# Hello Tmux!

If you're like me then you use a terminal a *lot*. If you were me 20 minutes ago then you would also have multiple terminal tabs open with various applications running. I had heard of an application from some of my peers before about the ability to open multiple terminal panes within the same terminal window. For a while I didn't look into it, but then (about 20 minutes ago) I had enough of swapping between terminal tabs and the editor I had been using (vscode). The software that I was told about was called screen, which is what is called a *terminal multiplexer*. After doing some research I found another terminal multiplexer (called tmux) that seemed to be a good contender to screen. I decided that I would try out tmux and see how it goes. With a quick and easy `sudo apt install tmux` the software was installed. The next thing to do is look for a cheatsheet, which after a quick search I found [one](https://tmuxcheatsheet.com).  

I have to say, after using tmux for only about 10 - 15 minutes, I am already finding myself absolutely loving it. Not only do I feel more comfortable using Vim as my primary editor now, but I also feel more effective/productive. The commands for using tmux aren't even that difficult. To start, we create a new tmux session, this is done by entering the command `tmux`. The next thing from here is either create a new window (which is done via `ctrl + b ~ c`) or split the pane (vertically -> `ctrl + b ~ %` or horizontially -> `ctrl + b ~ "`). To swap between windows, the command is `ctrl + b ~ n (for next) or p (for previous)`. To swap between panes, the command is `ctrl + b ~ arrow key direction`. For the icing on the cake there is an ability to *detach* from the session, which to explain in simple terms, it essentially suspends the session. To re-activate the session, simply enter the command `tmux attach`. One thing that tripped me up when using tmux was *scrolling*. A quick glance at the cheatsheet showed that you can scroll by entering copy mode (`ctrl + b ~ [`), then using the arrow keys. 
