# Introductory Survey

Before commencing an intensive study of any aspect of botanical science
or of any particular problem which deals with plants, it will be well for
us to make a brief survey of the plant kingdom as a whole, and of some of
the more important structures and functions of plants in general.

## The Plant Kingdom

About 250,000 differents kinds or *species* of plants have been
discovered and described, and every year botanical exploration and
careful study bring more of them to our knowledge. We have seen that the
problem of systematic botany is to name this host of plants and to
arrange and classify its members to a logical system. Over many of the
details of such a classification difference of opinion still exists, but
there is now rather general agreement as to the main groups into which
the plant kingdom should be divided. Four such divisions are commonly
recognized.

### The Thallophytes

These are lowly plants, various in their structure, activities, and
methods of reproduction, but agreeing in the possession of a simple body
without roots or leaves and in multiplying by single-celled *spores*. The
majority of Thallophytes inhabit water or moist places and are small and
soft-bodied plants.

There are two main series of Thallophytes: The *Algae* which possess the
green pigment *chlorophyll* and are thereby able to manufacture their own
food, and which include all the seaweeds and their fresh-water allies;
and the *Fungi*, which lack chlorophyll and consequently are obliged to
obtain their food from living animals and plants or from dead organic
material. Here belongs the vast array of bacteria, molds, blights, rusts,
toadstools, mushrooms, and similar plants, many o fwhich live as
parasites and are often the cause of serious disease of man and the lower
organisms.

## The Bryophytes or Moss Plants

These plants are distinguished from the Thallophytes chiefly by their
more highly developed sexual structures and their more complicated
methods of reproduction. The plant body of the Bryophytes has no roots,
and in many cases consists of only a flat, strap-like mass of green
tissue, but the higher members of the group possess very simple stems and
leaves. The plants are small and inconspicuous, and generally thrive best
in moist situations. Bryophytes are subdivided into the simple and lowly
*Liverworts* (Hepaticae) and the commoner and more highly specialized
*Mosses* (Musci).

## The Pteridophytes or Fern Plants

These possess true roots, stems, and leaves, essentially similar in
structure to those of the Seed Plants, but they still reproduce by spores
rather than by seeds. Compared with Bryophytes, the plant body is large
and vigorous, and it is well adapted to life on land. The three important
subdivisions of the Pteridophytes are: The *Ferns* (Filicales),
possessing large and feathery leaves on the backs of which the spores are
produced; The *Club Mosses* or *Ground Pines* (Lycopodiales), which have
spore-bearing cones, solid stems and scale-like, spirally arranged
leaves; and the *Horsetails* (Equisetales) also possessing cones but with
jointed, hollow stems and minute, whorled leaves.

## The Spermatophytes or Seed Plants

The dominant and and familiar portion of the earths vegetation today
consists of these plants, which are well adapted for life on land and
often attain great size. Their distinctive feature is the production of a
complex, many-celled reproductive body, the *seed*, in which is contained
an embryo plant and a supply of stored food.

Seed Plants are very numerous and exceedingly varied in form and
structure, ranging from small and delicate herbs to huge trees over three
hundred feet tall. They are the most conspicious and best known of all
the divisions of the plant kingdom, and provide the great bulk of the
foods, timbers, fibers, and other vegetable products which form the basis
of our civilization.

Two major subdivisions of the Seed Plants are recognized: The
*Gymnosperms*, which have primitive, often cone-like flowers and bear
their seeds openly exposed on scales as in our common coniferous trees;
and the *Angiosperms*, in which there is usually a typical flower with
its various floral parts, including an *ovary* in which the seeds are
enclosed during their development. There are only about 450 species of
Gymnosperms living today, but the Angiosperms are an enormous group of
more than 130,000 species and are our most familiar plants. They are
divided again into two main groups, the *Dicotyledons* and the
*Monocotyledons*, which differ from each other in the structure of the
seed, leaf, stem, and flower.

Underlying the differences by which these various groups are
distinguished from one another, there are many fundamental similarities
in structure and function which are common to all plants; but the marked
changes which appear as we pass from the lowest to the highest types make
very difficult a concise description of the characteristics of the plant
kingdom as a whole. It will therefore, be profitable for us to confine
our attention, at first, mainly to those plants which are most familiar
to everyone and of most obvious and immediate interest to man - the Seed
Plants.

The great variety of plant types and the diversity of conditions under
which they live renders it difficult to make general statements about
plants which are universally true, for exceptions to any such statement
may usually be found. Indeed, variability is one of the most notable
characteristics of all life. The student should therefore bear in mind
that many of the facts and principles set forth briefly and simply in an
elementary text are to be taken as true for typical cases and under
ordinary conditions, and they should be careful not to accept them as
necessarily and universally true for all plants and under all conditions.
Living things are too complicated to be described completely in simple
formulas.
