# Reproduction (aka Propagation)

Plant reproduction or propagation is the process of increasing the number
of plants of a particular species or cultivar. There are two primary
forms of plant propagation: sexual and asexual. In nature, propagation of
plants most often involves sexual reproduction, or the production of
viable seeds. When exposed to proper environmental conditions, these
seeds germinate and grow into mature, reproductive plants.
[[source]](https://extension.missouri.edu/publications/mg3)

The simplest type of asexual reproduction consists in the division of the
parent plant into two or more parts, each of which becomes independent.
It is a characteristic property of most plants that a portion of the
body, (particularly if it includes a bud) when removed and placed under
favorable conditions, will replace the missing parts and develop into a
new individual. This readiness for multiplication is made use of
extensively in the various arts of plant propagation, by which new
individuals are produced through *cuttings* and like processes. In a
somewhat similar manner, a bud or twig from one plant may be united so
intimately to another by *budding* or *grafting* that it thrives and
grows as an integral part of the plant to which it has been transferred.
One particular advantage of such a procedure is that it ensures a high
degree of uniformity among the offspring, since each one of them is in
fact a portion of the original individual. All true Concord grape vines
or Baldwin apple trees, for example, are simply detached parts of the
original vine or tree in which the variety originated.

In many plants, reproduction of this sort is a constant accompaniment of
the slow spread and dispersal of the vegetative parts which is
continually taking place. Thus a grass plant may become established in
one spot and gradually extend its area until it forms a considerable
patch of turf. Portions of this, through accident or decay, become
separated from one another, and a colony of plants takes the place of a
single individual. In a somewhat similar fashion the beech tree multiples
itself, buds arising on the roots of the parent tree until it is
surrounded by a grove of beeches. This method of reproduction, however,
is not very common among the seed plants.

In many species, structures have arisen which are particularly adapted
for aiding vegetative dispersal of the plant body and which thus partake
somewhat of the nature of reproductive structures. To this group belong
the *runner* or *stolon* of plants like the strawberry, the rapidly
spreading rootstocks of the quack grass, and the long, arching stems of
the blackberry, in which the tips touch the ground and there take root.
Other vegetative parts are sometimes modified still further as
reproductive organs. Perhaps the best known example of such is the
*tuber* of the potato, which is merely a short and very much thickened
underground stem, from the buds of which new potato plants arise the next
season. The *bulb*, as in the onion and hyacinth, and *corm*, as in the
crocus, are also short, stout stems with their lower leaves modified as
scales. They carry the plant over from one season to the next and their
buds ultimately give rise to a group of new plants.

Seed plants are characterized by their possession of a rather complex
reproductive apparatus known as the *flower*. This consists typically of
those structures intimately concerned with the development of the sexual
cells, together with others which contribute indirectly to the success of
the process of reproduction. *Stamens* and *pistils* are the essential
organs of the flower. Each stamen bears an *anther* or pollen sac and
within this sac are produced a great number of minute, single-celled
*pollen grains*, from the contents of each of which two male gametes
ultimately develop. The anther is commonly supported by a stalk or
*filament*. The pistil consists of a closed chamber, the *ovary*, at the
top of which is the *stigma*, a structure adapted to catch and hold the
pollen grains. The stigma is often support by a stalk or *style*. In the
ovary are borne the *ovules* or potential seeds, within each of which is
a female gamete or egg. The fertilization of an egg by a male gamete
starts the series of processes which result in the development of the
ovule into a seed.

## Chromosome Reduction

Certain noteworthy differences occur between the cell division which
preceeds the formation of the gametes and those which we have studied in
the ordinary vegetative tissues of the plant; and a knowledge of these
differences is essential to a thorough understanding of the laws of
inheritance, which we shall later discuss. In this division the
chromosomes, as they make their appearance out of the nuclear network,
are grouped in pairs; and when division takes place, the members of each
pair separate, one going to one of the newly formed nuclei and the other
to the other. The splitting of chromosomes which occurs in ordinary
mitosis, and by which the chromosome number is maintained, *does not
occur here*, and the resulting daughter nuclei (and the gametes derived
from them) therefore contain only *half* the chromosome number found in
the ordinary body cells of the plant. Such a division is accordingly
known as a *reduction division*. When the gametes later unite in
fertilization, each contributes its quota of chromosomes, and in the
fertilized egg the original chromosome number is thus restored and then
persists throughout all the cells of the plant which develops therefrom.

## Perianth

The pistil occupies the center of the flower, with the stamens in a
circle around it; and outside of these, in turn, is the *perianth*,
composed typically of two circles of parts. The inner one of these is the
*corolla* or a circle of *petals*. The petals are flat, somewhat
leaf-like structures, usually conspicuous in color and rather delicate in
texture, whose chief function is to attract to the flower those insects
which are important in effecting pollination. Finally, outside the
corolla is the *calyx* or circle of *sepals*. These are usually green or
greenish structures which protect the delicate inner organs of the flower
while in the bud. All floral parts are attached to the *receptacle* or
enlarged tip of the flower stalk.

## Variations in Floral Parts

These four groups of organs exhibit such great differences in the number,
shape, size, color, texture and relative position of their parts as to
give the flower a far greater range of structural diversity than the
other organs of the plant, and we therefore depend upon the flower very
largely for those characters which distinguish genera and families of
plants from one another. In number, the circles may differ considerably.
Among some of the more primitive orders there are several separate
pistils, but this part of the flower is more often single, at least as
far as its ovary is concerned, although from the number of stigmas or of
chambers in the ovary we have reason to believe that in many cases there
has been a fusion of several pistils, and that many-chambered ovary is
thus a *compound* structure. The stamens are often the most numerous of
the floral parts and are generally free from one another, although in
some families they may be partially fused together. The petals are
usually fewer than the stamens and rarely exceed ten in number. In
certain orderst they are united to form a continous or *gamopetalous* (as
opposed to a *polypetalous*) corolla. The sepals are generally of the
same number as the petals and, like them, may sometimes be fused together
into a *gamosepalous* (as opposed to *polysepalous*) calyx. Not only are
the members of one circle sometimes joined together, but two entire
circles may even be united. The corolla is sometimes attached to the
calyx and is thus *episepalous*. Similarly, the stamens may be
*epipetalous* (attached to the corolla) and the calyx *epigynous*
(attached to the ovary) and so on. In shape, floral parts vary
enormously. In higher plant groups, too, some of the sepals, petals or
stamens are different from the rest, with the result that an
unsymmetrical or *irregular* flower is produced, as opposed to the more
primitive *regular* type. In color, flowers range through practically the
entire spectrum, except that green is comparatively rare in the corolla.
In size there is also great diversity, although flowers more than a
decimeter in diameter are rare. In texture, flowers are generally soft
except for the calyx, the firmness of their parts being produced
turgidity of the cells rather than by skeletal issues. In certain cases,
however, notably in the grasses and allied families, the perianth
segments have become hard, dry, and chaffy. Any one, or more than one, of
the floral circles may sometimes be absent. If both calyx and corolla are
missing the flower is said the be *naked*. If it is either the stamens or
the pistil which is absent, the flower is *unisexual* and is called
either "male" or "female" according to the structures which it possesses.
If both male and female flowers are distinct from one another but are on
the same plant (as in corn, birch and many others) the plants are said to
be *monoecious*; if the two sexes are on separate plants (as in the
willow) the species is termed *dioecious*. In studying the evolution of
floral parts, evidence has been obtained that the sepals, petals, and
probably the stamens and units of the pistil are morphologically leaves;
and that the earliest floral type was perfectly regular, with its various
parts rather numerous and with no fusion whatever between circles or
between members of the same circle.

## Inflorescence

The arrangement of flowers on the plant is known as the *inflorescence*.
The flowers may be *solitary*, arising from the ground, or singly in the
axils of the leaves; or the leaves may be reduced to small *bracts*, the
internodes shortened, and the flowers thus grouped into definite
clusters. Such clusters are of various types as to shape and arrangement,
the commonest among them being the *raceme*, *spike*, *head*, *umbel*,
*corymb*, *panicle*, and *cyme*.

## Pollination

The first step in the accomplishment of reproduction is the transfer of
pollen from the anthers to the stigma, a process known as *pollination*.
At about the time the flower unfolds, the anthers open and liberate the
pollen grains. In rare cases the stigma lies so close to the anthers that
the pollen transferred thereto directly, and this may sometimes happen
even before the flower opens. In the great majority of cases, however,
this transfer is brought about by some external agency, and pollen from
the flowers of one plant is thus frequently carried to the flowers of
another. The two most important agencies in effecting pollination are the
wind and insects. Wind-pollinated or *anemophilous* flowers are
prominently exposed on the plant but are generally small, inconspicuous
and unisexual, possessing a poorly developed perianth, abundant dry and
light pollen, and feathery stigmas. Insect-pollinated or *entomophilous*
flowers, on the other hand, are conspicuous or possess marked odor, and
are characterized by a well-developed corolla, pollen grains which tend
to adhere in masses, stigmas which are sticky, and in many cases by the
presence of *nectaries* secreting a sugary liquid. The insect is guided
to the flower by its color or odor and visits it either to secure nectar,
the source of honey, or pollen, the source of "bee bread". Pollen readily
adheres to the hairy bodies of these insects, and as it is thus carried
about from flower to flower it often comes in contact with a stigma, to
the sticky surface of which it is transferred. Insects belonging to the
order Hymenoptera (the bees and their allies) are more important than any
others in effecting pollination. In many cases we have evidence that
offspring which arise from a *cross*, or union of sexual cells
contributed by two *different* parents, are superior in vigor to those in
which both gametes came from the same plant. Perhaps in response to this
fact, there are an enormous number of devices among floweing plants which
tend to insure *cross-pollination*, or the transfer of pollen from one
flower to another, and to prevent *self-pollination*, or the transfer of
pollen from anther to stigma of the same flower. Anthers and stigmas, for
example, may ripen at different times, with the result that the anthers
liberate their pollen either before the stigma of the same flower is ripe
for pollination or after it has become no longer receptive. In many
cases, also, pollen from another plant is better able to effect
fertilization than the plants own pollen; and in extreme instances the
plant may be actually *self-sterile*, its own pollen having no effect
whatever upon its stigma. More striking than these methods, however, are
the multitude of structural devices in entomophilous flowers whereby
self-pollination through insect agency is rendered difficult or
impossible and cross-pollination made easy. This is sometimes
accomplished by *floral dismorphism*, in which there are two types of
flowers, so constructed that the points where the anther and stigma touch
the insects body are exactly reversed, with the result that the pollen of
one is apt to reach the stigma of the other. More common are the various
and often intricate devices in which hairs, springs, traps, and other
agencies are employed. These reach their highest development in such
families of irregular-flowered plants as the legumes and orchids, and
have long excited the curosity and admiration of naturalists.

## Fertilization

Pollination, however, is only a step toward the union of male and female
gametes which we know as *fertilization*. Although the pollen grain is a
single cell, it is not the male gamete. At about the time of pollination,
the nucleus of the grain divides into two, one of which, the
*tube-nucleus*, remains free in the cytoplasm. The other nucleus
surrounds itself with a mass of cytoplasm of its own, sometimes with a
separate wall, and is known as the *generative cell*. Shortly after the
pollen has reached the stigma the thick wall of the pollen grain bursts
at one point and out of the grain proceeds a thin-walled *pollen-tube*.
Near the tip of this moves the tube-nucleus, followed by the generative
cell. This tube bored through the tissues of the style and carries the
contents of the pollen grain down into the ovary and to the mouth of an
ovule. Meanwhile the generative cell divides into two *male cells*, which
are the true male gametes. By this time the ovule has become prepared for
fertilization. It possesses one or two coats or *integuments*, later
developing into seed-coats, which cover it except at one point, the mouth
or *micropyle*. Here the pollen-tube usually enters. Inside the
integuments is a thin nutritive layer, the *nucellus*. Within this, in
turn, and ordinarily occupying the whole central portion of the ovule, is
the *embryo-sac*. This is a small, sap-filled cavity with three cells at
each end and a naked nucleus, the *endosperm nucleus*, near its center.
The three cells at the end of the sac farthest from the micropyle play no
part in fertilization or seed development. Of the three at the micropylar
end, however, one is usually distinguishable by its greater size and is
the female gamete or *egg*. *With the nucleus of this egg cell fuses on
e of the male gametes which has come down the pollen tube*. This union
produces the *fertilized egg*, and *from this single cell* develops the
entire embryo of the seed and thus the young plant which grows therefrom.
This fertilized egg, in which are combined the protoplasm of the two
parents, is the *sole* direct link between parents and offspring; and
only across this exceedingly narrow bridge are characteristics
transmitted by inheritance from one generation to the next. The
fertilization of the egg by a male cell is not the only cell union which
takes place at this time, for the other male cell fuses with the
endosperm nucleus, and from the cell thus formed arises the endosperm or
food-storage tissue of the seed. Fertilization effected by gametes from
the same plant is known as *self-fertilization*; that by gametes from
different plants as *cross-fertilization*.

## Seed Development

After fertilization has been effected, the petals and stamens drop off
and the ovule gradually develops into the *seed*. Various changes
accompany this process. The whole structure grows markedly in size and
the integuments increase in thickness, become hard and woody, and close
over the micropyle. In many seeds a considerable mass of *endosperm* or
food-storage tissue is developed, but in other this is much less
abundant. Within the endosperm is the *embryo* or young plant, which has
developed from the fertilized egg. In dicotyledonous plants the embryo is
differentiated into three main portions; the *hypocotyl* or primitive
stem and root, its tip directed toward the micropyle; the two seedleaves
or *cotyledons*, attached to the upper end of the hypocotyl, and the
*plumule* or bud, inserted between the cotyledons. The cotyledons may be
very thick and serve entirely for food storage, as in the pea; they may
be thin and leaf-life, serving as foliage leaves from the beginning, as
in the morning glory, or they may combine both functions, as in the
squash. In *monocotyledonous* plants endosperm is always well developed
and the comparatively small embryo consists of a flat disc, the
*scutellum* (which probably represents a single cotyledon) to the face of
which are attached an upward-pointing, sheathed *plumule* or bud and a
downward-pointing minature root or *radicle*. The scutellum serves to
absorb food from the endosperm and to transmit it to the growing portions
of the embryo. The ripe seed is thus a structure in which the partially
developed young plant, well protected and provided with an abundant
supply of food for future growth, is able to pass through a more or less
extended period of dormancy.

## The Fruit

The ripened ovary, together with its contents the seeds, and with any
other structures intimately associated with these, is known as the
*fruit*. The ripened wall of the ovary is called the *pericarp*. Fruits
are various and many different types are recognized and named, but we
shall mention here only the most common and important of them. Some are
dry at maturity and split open. Such are the *capsule* (as in the lily),
which arises from a compound ovary, and the *pod* (as in the bean), which
arises from a simple or single-chambered one. Others are dry but do not
split open. Such are *achene* (as in the buttercup), the commonest type
of single-seeded fruit; the *nut* (as in the hickory), in which the
pericarp becomes hard and woody, and the *grain* (as in the corn), the
characteristic fruit of the grass family, in which seed coats and
pericarp are firmly fused. These single-seeded fruits are often mistaken
for seeds. Many fruits become fleshy, at least in part. In the *berry*
(as in the blueberry), the entire fruit is so except the seeds, which
have thick coats. In the stone fruit or *drupe* (as in the cherry), the
outer part of the pericarp is fleshy but the inner portion, enclosing the
seed, is a hard and woody "stone". In the *pome*, represented by such
fruits as the apple and pear, it is the receptacle grown around and
enclosing the fruit, which becomes fleshy, the pericarp being represented
here only by the tough membranes of the core.

## Seed Dispersal

It is obvious that to leave successful offspring a plant must not only
develop seeds but must provide for their dispersal; and in bringing this
about, almost as great a variety of adaptive devices are employed as
there are to insure cross-pollination. Dependence is placed upon various
agencies, but chiefly the wind and animals. Many seeds or even entire
fruits are light and provided with wings or tufts of long hairs, so that
they present a large surface area for the wind to catch, and are often
wafted many miles. In the case of the various "tumble weeds" the entire
plant breaks off at the base of the stem and is rolled along over the
ground by the wind. Other fruits and seeds develop hooks, spines, or
sticky secretions which enable them to adhere to the fur of animals or
the feet of birds and thus to be carried for long distances. In fleshy
fruits, the fleshy portion or pulp is usually bright in color and is
rendered attractive to animals by its taste. Birds are particularly
important to the dissemination of the seeds of such fruits. In a few
cases like the witch hazel, the fruit splits open with such force that
the seeds are projected through the air for a considerable distance. The
seeds and fruits on the water have been known to travel thus for hundreds
of miles.

## Seed Germination

The seed remains dormant until a favorable environment appears, when the
embryo begins to grow and the seed is said to *germinate*. The conditions
necessary for germination are a plentiful supply of water and oxygen and
a moderately high temperature. When these are fulfilled, metabolism
begins vigorously in the embryo and in the cells of the endosperm. Water
is absorbed in large quantities and the embryo swells, bursts the seed
coats, sends its root into the ground and its stem into the air, and
becomes a *seedling*. The food stored in endosperm or cotyledons is
digested and used for the development of new organs. It is generally
sufficient in amount to provide for the growth of the seedling to a point
where the latter can begin to manufacture its own food. Indeed, as soon
as the young stem and leaves get above the ground they turn gree and
commence photosynthetic activity, soon supplying an abundance of food
which ensures the rapid development of the plant from the seedling stage
to maturity, at which point the cycle of reproduction is complete.
