# Soil

Comprised of 40% rock particles, 25% water, 25% air, and 10% organic
matter. It has 3 main uses: provides an anchorage and main support for
the plant, furnishes the supply of water, and contributes mineral salts
essential to the plants successful activity. Soils vary much in physical
texture, chemical composition, depth, origin, richness, and other
respects, but all are normally made up of a mixture of distinct
components, each of which has its particular influence upon the life of
plants. These components are rock-particles, water, air, humus, dissolved
substances, and organisms.


## Rock Particles

Makes up the bulk and basic material of a soil and is composed of small,
angular particles which have been formed by disintegration of rock. These
make up 90% of the weight of ordinary good soil, furnish the necessary
anchorage for the plant, and, through the substances dissolved from their
surfaces, contribute the supply of available nutrient materials. The
particles vary greatly in size, from those of fine clay to those of
coarse gravel. They also differ in shape and chemical composition
according to the type of rock producing them. The irregularity of contour
which these particles display makes it impossible for them to fit very
closely together, and a considerable amount of space (pore-space) is thus
left between them which bay be occupied by air or water. In soils which
are in good condition for the growth of ordinary plants the particles
cohere in groups to form *crumbs* or *floccules*, the component grains of
which are held together by water-films or by such a cementing substance
as clay. One important purpose of tillage is to impart this crumb
stucture of *flocculation* to a soil. At the soil surface, by the direct
action of the rain or by other means, these crumbs may be broken into
their constituent particles, which then pack closely together and on
drying harden into a firm, clay-like crust.

## Water

Of vital importance, and in most cases the only one, is the rain which
falls upon the soil surface. Various fates await this water. A
considerable part of it may not enter the soil at all if the surface is
hard or the rainfall heavy, but may drain away instead. This *run-off* is
lost to plants, and may even do harm by washing away a portion of the
soil itself. The water which does enter the soil may either *percolate*
downward between the particles under the influence of gravity, or may be
held in the soil by *capillarity*. Percolating or *gravitational* water
passes downward rapidly if the soil particles are coarse, more slowly if
they are finer, until it arrives at a level where all the soil spaces are
filled with standing or *hydrostatic* water. This level is known as the
*water-table*. Its position at any given point determines the height at
which water will stand in a well dug at that point, and its distance
below the surface varies from place to place and is subject to much
fluctuation. A similar saturated condition occurs in the upper soil
layers after heavy rains, but persists there for only a short time. When
water has percolated downward to this level it is often beyond the reach
of roots, and is thus quite unavailable to plants. *Capillary* water is
water held in the soil by force of capillarity. Common observation
teaches that when an object (such as ones hand) is immersed in water and
then lifted out again, some water still adheres to its surface in a thin
film, or "wets" the object. This is due to the fact that there is greater
attraction between the surface of the object and the water than is
exerted by the force of gravity or the cohesion of the water particles
themselves. Any material with a large amount of surface, internal or
external, which may be wetted (such as a sponge, blotting paper or coarse
fabric) will therefore hold within itself, when thoroughly soaked, a
great amount of water which will not drain out under gravity. For exactly
the same reason, much of the water entering a soil will fail to percolate
through it but will instead adhere in thin films to the surfaces, very
great in total area, which are presented by the multitude of soil
particles. If the amount of rainfall is small, all of it may thus be
retained and none lost through percolation. Each particles in such a
moist soil is covered by a thin layer of water. The films about adjacent
particles coalesce, filling the minuter spaces and lining those that are
larger, and a continuous film-system is thus setup. It is this *film* or
*capillary* water which furnishes plants with the great bulk of their
water-supply. One of the important objects in manipulating a soil is to
increase, by one means or other, this *water-holding capacity*, and thus
to prevent waste through run-off or percolation. The principle of
capillarity is of further importance in determining all movements of
water in the soil other than the downward one due to gravity. The
familiar fact that when a narrow glass tube is placed in water, the water
will rise inside the tube to a point somewhat higher than its level
outside, is due to the attraction between the surface of the glass and
the water, an attraction which is sufficient to lift water against
gravity. The lifting force will be proportional to the exposed surface of
the tube, and therefore where the volume of water is small in relation to
this surface (as is the case inside the tube) the water will rise
somewhat before the weight of the lifted column counterbalances the pull
exerted by the surface attraction. Obviously, the narrower the tube, the
higher the column of water will rise, since the volume of liquid to be
lifted will be smaller in proportion to the area of the attracting
surface. Thus, in any material the structure of which presents a great
amount of surface surrounding small but communicating tubes, pores or
other narrow spaces, as in blotting paper, lamp-wicks, and the like,
water will evidently be carried to a considerable distance in all
directions by capillarity. Just such a material as this is the soil. The
multitude of its tiny particles, packed closely together, form a
capillary system which is able to carry water far. This water tends to
surround each particle in a thin, capillary film, but if the soil
particles are very coarse the film cannot pass around them, and under
such conditions the ascent of water necessarily stops. Water moves
readily within the films and when those at the top of the ascending
column are thinned through evaporation or through the attraction exerted
by still higher and unwetter surfaces, the films below are drawn upon,
and water passes upward through the whole system. This movement continues
until the weight of the water lifted balances the surfaced attraction at
the top of the column. The height to which water will rise by capillarity
is dependent chiefly on the size of the soil particles; for the smaller
the particles, the larger will will be their surface in proportion to the
spaces between them, and thus the higher will be the rise of water. In
ordinary soil this rise varies roughly from two to twenty feet. It is
evident, therefore, that water which has percolated very far below the
surface ordinarily cannot be made available to plants again through
capillary ascent. In most soils there is a capillary movement of water
toward the soil surface, where it evaporates. If the particles at the
surface are very close together, as they are where the soil has been
packed down or where a crust has been formed, a very efficient capillary
system is produced there which connects the soil surface with deeper
water-holding layers, and thus greatly hastens the loss of water by
drawing it up to a point where it may be evaporated. An important purpose
of tillage is to prevent such waste of water by breaking up the capillary
system at the surface and forming there a layer of loose, coarse material
called a *mulch*. Capillary movement of water is by no means always
vertical but may take place in all directions within a soil, just as ink
spreads in all directions in a piece of blotting paper. This movement
tends to continue until the water films are of equal thickness throughout
the entire soil mass, causing it to be uniformly moist. When water is
removed at any particular point, as by surface evaporation or root
absorption, it is therefore darawn thither from all other points until
equilibrium is restored. In soils which have lost all their capillary
water by evaporation, there still remains around each particle an
exceedingly thin film of *hygroscopic* water, which clings so tenaciously
that it may be driven off only by subjecting the soil to a high
temperature. When the air is very dry, this water is present in minimum
amount, but when humidity rises, more water may be taken up directly from
the air, or *hygroscopically*. This type of water is removed with such
difficulty from the soil particles, however, that the plant is able to
obtain little or none of it.

## Air

Since oxygen is essential for the healthy growth of ordinary plant roots,
the presence in the soil of a plentiful supply of air is a matter of
vital importance. If the spaces between the soil particles become filled
with water, most of the air is necessarily driven out, and when this
condition of saturation is long maintained, ordinary plants suffer. We
have seen, however, that such excess of water normally passes downward by
percolation, and as it does so the soil spaces fill again with air. In
most cultivated soils, from 20-35% of the volume consists of air spaces.
The composition of the air which fills these is often somewhat different
from that of the atmosphere, the proportion of carbon dioxide being
relatively high. Plowing tends to increase greatly the air content of a
soil, since the structure of the whole mass is loosened and the crumbs
are more widely separated. A soil in this condition is said to be in good
*tilth*. Where water occurs only in capillary form much air is present in
the larger spaces, and such a state of the soil is therefore clearly the
most favorable for plant growth since then, and then only, is a plentiful
supply of water combined with a plentiful supply of oxygen.

## Organic Matter

All rich soils contain a considerable amount of material derived from the
dead bodies of organisms, particularly plants. Roots which die and remain
in the soil, and leaves and other plant parts which fall on the soil
surface, are the sources from which this organic matter is mainly derived
in nature. In the practice of agriculture it is increased in amount by
various artificial means. After entering the soil it soon begins to
undergo decomposition, and for the most part is finally broken down into
simple end-products - carbon dioxide, water, and ammonia. As this organic
material decays it becomes characteristically dark in color and undergoes
a series of complex chemical changes. In this condition it is known by
the general name of *humus*. Humus is of importance to plants in many
ways. It improves the physical condition of the soil, for because of its
coarse and fragmentary character it tends to separate the particles and
thus increase materially the air-content of the soil. Since humus absorbs
water readily, its presence also adds to a soils water-nutrient
materials, notably an abundant supply of nitrogen compounds, which
ultimately become available to plants. Humus is also the seat and
food-supply of the soil bacteria, minute organisms which are
indispensable in plant nutrition. Any treatment of the soil which will
increase its humus content will therefore tend to increase its
productivity, and whatever decreases the humus content will impoverish
the soil.

## Dissolved Substances

Soil water is by no means pure water but carries dissolved within it a
great variety of substances. Anything which is to be taken in by the
roots of plants must be in solution, and it is consequently obvious that
these dissolved substances are the only portion of the soil, aside from
water itself, which is directly available as nutrient material for
plants. Their origin and chemical composition are therefore of much
importance botanically. The solvent power of soil water is increased by
the presence within it of carbon dioxide, liberated in the respiration of
plant roots and of the lower organisms. Thus reinforced, water not only
attacks the surfaces of the rock particles but absorbs any soluble
material which may appear in the humus or as a product of bacterial
activity. There is a great variety of substances present in the soil
solution, and we know from chemical analysis of the ash (reside left
after complete combustion of the plant tissues) of plants that very many
of them may be taken into the plant body. Compounds of nitrogen, sodium,
potassium, calcium, magnesium, iron, manganese, aluminium, phosphorus,
sulphur, chlorine, and silicon are commonly absorbed by the roots, and
many others may be taken up occasionally. Certain of these elements are
far more important to the plant than others, however, and it has been
clearly proven by experiment that seven are essential for normal plant
growth: sulphur, phosphorus, calcium, magnesium, potassium, iron, and
nitrogen. The actual amount of these mineral nutrients taken up by the
plant is exceedingly small in proportion to the size of the plant body,
but in the activities of protoplasm each plays a very necessary part, and
a soil which is deficient in any one of them will be unable to support
vegetation successfully. The removal of large amounts of nutrient
materials from agricultural soils, in the form of crops and in other
ways, reduces the available supply of certain chemical elements, notably
nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, to such an extent that a fresh
supply must be returned to the soil if abundant plant growth is to be
maintained permanently thereon. This necessitates the common practice of
adding to the soil various types of fertilizers which renew the supply of
essential salts there available to plants.

## Organisms

Aside from its service as a medium for the root growth of higher plants,
the soil provides a dwelling-place for a great variety of other
organisms, whose activities have a profound effect on the composition of
the soil and on the processes which go on therein. Rodents, insects, and
angleworms all modify the physical character of the soil by their abode
within it. Those most minute and lowly of living things, however, which
we group together as *micro-organisms* are of far greater importance, for
experiment has shown that without their presence the soil would soon
become unfit to support a vegetation of higher plants. Most notable among
these micro-organisms are the *bacteria*, tiny, single-celled plants
which lack the green pigment chlorophyll. Many of these - the bacteria of
decay - decompose the complex organic substances found in humus into such
simple end-products as carbon dioxide, water, and ammonia, thus releasing
great quantities of nutrient materials which would otherwise be locked up
and useless in dead bodies of animals and plants. Still other bacteria in
the soil cause chemical changes of various sorts there, the results of
which are of great moment to the higher plants. Notable among these are
bacteria concerned with the transformations of nitrogen and its
compounds, for through their activity alone is the available supply of
this necessary element maintained in the soil. The continual circulation
of nitrogen through its various successive stations in organism, air, and
soil is known as the *Nitrogen Cycle*. Complex nitrogenous substances
returned to the soil in the bodies of dead animals and plants are broken
down by the bacteria of decay into simpler compounds, which are finally
reduced to ammonia. Since most plants can use nitrogen only when it
occurs in the form of nitrate salts, however, this ammonia is not
directly available to them but must first be converted into nitrate salts
through the process of *nitrification*. This is carried on by two types
of nitfifying bacteria; the *nitrite* bacteria, which change ammonia to
nitrites, and the *nitrate* bacteria, which in turn converts nitrites
into nitrates. In this form nitrogen is readily absorbed and assimilated
by plants, and is ultimately returned to the soil again in the bodies of
plants or animals, thus completing the cycle. Through the activity of
another group of these minute organisms, certain of the seed plants are
also able to take advantage of the enormous supply of nitrogen in the
atmosphere, which is ordinarily quite unavailable. These are the
*nitrogenfixing* bacteria. They are present in most soils and cause the
development of the tubercles or nodules usually found on the roots of
plants belonging to the Legume family, which inclues beans, peas, clover,
alfalfa, and similar plants. These bacteria are able to absorb the free
gaseous nitrogen of the air and to build it into nitrogenous compounds
in their bodies, whence it ultimately becomes available to the particular
plant on the roots of which the bacteria grew. Without drawing at all
upon the nitrogen compounds in the soil, a leguminous plant is
consequently able to aquire an abundant supply of this important
element. In the case of many species of plants, particularly those which
grow in forests or other situations rich in humus, thread-like filaments
of fungi are intimately associated with the smaller roots, entering their
outer tissues and surrounding the root with a web-like jacket of fungus
threads. These very largely take the place of root-hairs and aid the
plant in absorbing water and nutrient material from the soil; and the
fungus, as well, is evidently benefited by such relationship. This
root-fungus association is known as *mycorrhiza*. Certain plants have
become so dependent in this way upon particular species of fungi that
they cannot thrive when these fungi are absent.

In conclusion, we may emphasize again the extreme complexity of the soil
and the vital significance to plants of its composition and of the
changes which go on within it. The study of this remarkable material has
required the collaboration of almost all of the sciences, but we still
lack a precise knowledge of many of its aspects and fail to understand
clearly the manner in which it affects the life of plants growing in it.
