# The Stem and Its Functions

We have shown that the root, which absorbs water and mineral substances
from the soil, and the leaf, which carries on the manufacture of food,
are the primary vegetative organs of the plant. A third member, the
*stem*, connects these two. It forms a conspicuous feature of most plants
and in woody species constitutues the great bulk of their bodies. Its
functions, though secondary to the major activities which we have
mentioned, are nevertheless essential ones. It serves to dispose the
leaves in situations favorable for photosynthesis, and provides a highway
for transportation between leaf and root. In addition, the stem
frequently becomes a storage-organ and may be variously modified for
other special functions.

## The External Structure of the Stem

The stem displays a wide range of variation in size and in external and
internal structure, according to the habit or growth-form which the plant
assumes. In *herbs*, where the whole shoot dies back to the ground during
periods unfavorable to vegetative activity or at the completion of a
given cycle, the stem is comparatively slender and soft in texture. In
plants with perennial above-ground parts, however, it grows thicker from
year to year and becomes hard and woody, forming the stout stems
characteristic of *shrubs* and *trees*. In shrubs the stem is
comparatively short and slender and is usually much branched, even close
to the ground. In trees, it grows taller and is developed for some
distance upward into a main stem or *trunk* which may become very thick.
Woody stems transitional between these two types often occur.

### Buds

The growth of the stem in length takes place only at certain definite
points, where the cells are thin-walled and capable of active division.
In many stems, particularly those which are perennial and woody, these
growing-points are protected by leaves or scales and are then known as
*buds*. Buds may be *terminal*, developing at the tip of the stem, or
*lateral*, arising from the sides. Within the bud are not only the
beginnings of the young stem but of the various structures which are
borne upon it, such as leaves and flowers. The *bud scales*, which
protect these delicate parts, are usually stout and impervious.

The terminal bud governs the elongation of the stem, and through the
development of lateral buds, *branches* arise. The shape of the aerial
portion of the plant is determined primarily by the number and
arrangement of these branches and by their rate of growth relative to
each other and to the main stem.

In certain herbaceous plants the terminal bud produces a flower or
flower-cluster, and the growth of the stem in length usually ceases at
this point. Such *determinate* growth is not common among woody plants,
however, and their stems continue to elongate indefinitely.

### Leaves

Leaves are borne throughout the length of the stem in herbaceous plants
and on the twigs of the current years growth in woody forms. That point
on a stem at which a leaf is attached is called a *node* and the region
between two nodes, an *internode*. The position of the node also governs
the position of the lateral bud, for such a bud normally arises only in
the leaf *axil*, or upper angle between leaf and stem.

The arrangement of leaves on the stem, or its *phyllotaxy*, may
display many different types. If but one leaf occurs at a node the next
one above it arises from the other side of the stem, and the arrangement
is thus an *alternate* one. These two leaves may be exactly half way
around the stem from each other, but it is much more common for their
angle of divergence to be less than 180Â° and for the points of attachment
of a series of successive leaves thus to form a loose spiral around the
stem. The closeness of this spiral and the position of the leaves thereon
show great diversity, but are generally constant within any particular
species. If two leaves arise from the same node they are always directly
across the stem from each other and are said to be *opposite* in
arrangement. When there are more than two leaves at a node, they are
disposed about the stem in a circle or *whorl*.

### Surface

The surface of a young stem is protected only by an epidermis, but later
this is replaced in woody plants by a characteristic layer of corky
cells, the *bark*. The necessary exchange of gases between the air and
the living tissues of the stem takes place through the *lenticels*, small
spots or strips where the bark tissue is softer and looser than
elsewhere.

### Other Stem Types

The typical upright, foliage-beraing stem has sometimes become radically
modified for the performance of other functions than support and
conduction. Many plants have abandoned the erect habit, and their weak,
slender stems climb or scamble by various means over other objects or lie
prostate on the ground. In certain herbs the main stem may even become
subterranean, in which condition it is known as a *rootstock* or
*rhizome*. Typical stems give opportunity for the storage of a certain
amount of food reserves, especially in pith and cortex, but in some
species this function is so greatly developed that the stem system , or
certain parts of it, becomes essentially a storage organ only. This
condition exists in most rootstocks, and its extreme development results
in a reduction of the stem to a short, thick *tuber* such as we know in
the potat, which is morphologically a stem but now shows little obvious
resemblance to that organ. The *bulb* and the *corm* are other examples
of highly modified underground stems.

## The Internal Structure of the Stems

In the cross section of a typical young stem there may be distinguished
the same three types of tissue which are present in the root, but they
are arranged somewhat differently. Outside the whole is the *epidermis*,
consisting of a single cell-layer, and often replaced entirely, at an
early stage, by a zone of *corky bark*. Beneath this is the *cortex*,
varying in thickness but rarely occupying as prominent a a place in the
stem as it does in the root. Beneath the cortex lies the *fibro-vascular
cylinder* which, unlike its counterpart in the root, is arranged in the
form of a hollow tube. The core of this tube is occupied by the *pith*, a
tissue much resembling the cortex. A more detailed account of the
character of the cells composing these tissues may be appropriately
undertaken now, for although all the tissues here mentioned are present
in root, stem, and leaf, they reach their greatest differentiation and
complexity in the stem, and in this region of the plant they can
therefore most profitably be studied. The structure of the fibro-vascular
tissues of a woody dicotyledonous plant can well be seen in Figs. 49 and
50 (TODO: Add all figures from the book), a transverse and a radial
longitudinal section through a portion of the stem shown in Fig. 48.

### Protective Layers

The epidermal cells resemble those of the leaf epidermis and require no
special comment. In stems which are growing in thickness, however, the
epidermis is soon sloughed off and its protective function is assumed by
a layer of corky cells formed directly under it and constantly renewed.
In these cells the protoplasm soon disappears and the normal cellulose
wall becomes corky or *suberized* and is thus rendered almost impermeable
to air or water. The lenticels, which we have already mentioned, are
spots in this corky layer where the cells are somewhat loose and spongy
and thus allow the passage of gases.

### Cortex and Pith

The cortex and the pith are very similar in constitution. Their cells
usually remain alive, are roughly spherical in shape, retain their
cellulose walls and function chiefly in the storage of food. To such
undifferentiated tissues the term *parenchyma* is often applied. In older
woody stems the pith often dries up and collapses; and the cortex,
crushed by the expansion of the wood underneath it, is finally sloughed
off.

### Bast

The fibro-vascular cylinder is composed of two distinct tissues. On the
outside is the *bast* or *phloem*, the function of which is to transport
the elaborated foods - the carbohydrates, fats, and proteins - from one
part of the plant to another, especially from regions of manufacture to
those of storage or consumption. The cells concerned in this process are
the *sieve-tubes*, living cells with thin cellulose walls but unique in
their lack of a nucleus. They are elongated parallel to the main axis of
the stem and their end walls (more rarely their sides) are provided with
*sieve-plates* or definite groups of small perforations. Through these
perforations extend threads of cytoplasm from one cell to another, so
that the living substance of each sieve-tube is directly continuous with
that of the adjacent ones. In the highest seed plants there is next to
each sieve-tube a small *companion cell*, provided with an abundance of
cytoplasm and a nucleus. In addition to these two types, groups of long
and very thick-walled cells, the *bast-fibers*, characteristically occur
in the phloem, and some parenchyma is usually present there also.

### Wood

The inner portion of the fibro-vascular cylinder consists of the *wood*
or *xylem*, which provides mechanical rigidity for the stem and
transports the stream of water and dissolved substanced from root to
leaf. As essential elements of the xylem we find cells which are much
elongated parallel to the main axis of the stem and in which the
cellulose walls have become very thick and woody. Such walls are said to
be *lignified*. As soon as one of these cells is fully developed, it dies
and its protoplasmic contents disappears, so that only the thick, woody
cell-wall is left. Definite thin areas or *pits* occur at frequent
intervals along this wall and facilitate the rapid movement of water. In
simpler types of wood, such a cell is able to provide both the necessary
rigidity and conductive capacity and is known as a *tracheid*. In the
higher types, however, this simple element has become specialized in two
directions and has given rise to long and very heavy-walled cells, the
*wood-fibers*, in which almost no cavity remains and which contribute a
high degree of mechanical strength to the wood; and the *vessel-cells* or
*tracheal cells*, much shorter, with wide cavities, and walls which are
comparatively thin and are provided with large perforations in their
ends. These cells, laid end to end in vertical rows, constitute the
*ducts* or *vessels*, so characteristic of the wood of many plants, which
carry the ascending stream of water through the stem. Parenchyma cells
sometimes occur among the lignified elements and like them may be
elongated vertically. Other parenchyma cells are elongated *at right
angles* to the stem and dispersed among the woody cells in horizontal
bands or ribbons running out htrough the xylem along the radii of the
stem. These structures are known as the *woody-rays*, and in somewhat
modified form extend also into the bast. They facilitate the horizontal
transfer of materials in the stem and are of particular importance as
centers of food-storage.

### Cambium

A narrow layer of thin-walled cells, the *cambium*, separates the wood
from the bast. Through its activity new cells are added to the outside of
the wood and the inside of the bast, and the thickness of the stem is
thereby increased. Among woody plants, such growth continues from year to
year and each seasons increment, or *annual ring*, is easily
recognizable.

At each node a small but complete segment of the fibro-vascular ring
separates from the rest and passes out through the cortex into the base
of the petiole, causing a break, or *leaf-gap*, in the ring. Into each
leaf may enter one, three, or five or more of these *leaf-traces* which
are destined to pass upward through the petiole and to form the system of
veins in the blade.

### Woody and Herbaceous Stems

The perennial woody stem in which the fibro-vascular cylinder, as seen in
cross section, forms a continuous and rather wide ring (except for the
leaf-gaps), and which recieves additions in thickness year by year
through cambial activity, is probably the most ancient stem-type among
seed plants; and the herbaceous condition, where the stems are much
softer and shorter-lived, has apparently been derived form it in
response to climatic changes or for other reasons. In herbaceous species,
the amount of fibro-vascular tissue has become proportionally very much
less. This may be due simply to a decrease in activity of the entire
cambium, or to the breaking up of the cylinder into separate bundles, but
in general any herbaceous stem is roughly comparable to a one-year-old
twig of the particular woody stem-type from which it has been evolved.
The herbaceous stem in Fig. 55, with its thin but continous vascular
ring, has probably arisen from some such woody form as shown in Fig. 53,
where the vascular ring is similarly continuous and homogeneous. The stem
in Fig. 56, however, in which the cylinder has been broken into distinct
and completely separate bundles, is quite different in type and has
probably arisen from a woody stem somewhat resembling that in Fig. 54,
where the vascular ring is divided into segments by the development of
very wide rays. Cambial activity is usually weaker opposite rays than
opposite the woody segments of the cylinder, and the stouter herbs of
this type, the rays therefore tend to form broad constrictions in the
ring. In more delicate herbaceous stems the constrictions finally become
complete, the broad rays disappear, and the cylinder is thus broken up
into a ring of separate segments or *fibro-vascular bundles*. Each of
these consists of a group of wood cells on its inner side and of bast
cells on its outer, with a vestige of cambium between. Connecting the
cambium layers of two adjacent bundles there may be a weak
*interfascicular* cambium, producing a few layers of parenchyma cells. In
many herbaceous stems, however, the bundles, each surrounded by a
*bundle-sheath* of thick-walled cells, are quite distinct and widely
separated from one another, with no remnant whatever of a cambial zone
between them.

In still more highly specialized stems, characteristic of
monocotyledonous plants, the bundles are no longer arranged in a ring but
are scattered irregularly throughout the whole area of the stem (Fig.
57). The individual bundles are very distinctive in appearance (Fig. 58),
each possessing a large air-space or *lacuna*, two large vessels, and a
patch of very regularly arranged sieve tubes and companion cells. In such
a stem no distinction between pith and cortex now remains. The departure
of the leaf-traces here is very complex, a large number of bundles moving
outward from the center of the stem and entering the sheathing leaf-base.

## The Structure of Wood

In shrubs and trees (conifers and dicotyledons alone in this context) the
great bulk of the stem, particularly in its older portions, consists of
but one tissue, the wood. Wood is so important in the economy of the
plant and of such great significance to man that we are justified in
studying it a little more closely than we have the other tissues.

Through the activity of the cambium (a fuller account of which we shall
reserve for the chapter on growth) a new concentric layer of wood cells
is added each year to the outside of the woody cylinder. The tracheids
and ducts produced at the beginning of the growth in the spring are
usually of large diameter and are accompanied by comparatively new
fibers, and it is apparently in this *spring wood* that most of the
upward conduction of water takes place. In the later-formed portion of
the annual ring, the water-carrying cells are fewer and narrower, and the
bulk of the tissue is composed of fibers. This *summer wood* is
responsible for most of the rigidity and strength of the stem. In large
branches and trunks, the older portion of the wood, consisting of the
first-formed annual rings at the center of the stem, in time becomes dead
throughout and ceases to perform its functions of water-conduction and
storage. It then constitutes the *heart-wood* (Fig. 59) and is frequently
distinguished from the outer layers by its darker color. The living and
functioning part of the wood is its youngest portion and is known as the
*sap-wood* (Fig. 59). This, of course, is on the outside of the woody
cylinder, and it is usually constant in width in any particular species,
its outermost is added by the activity of the cambium. All of the
non-woody cells here (the parenchyma cells and ray cells) are alive.

Wood is usually cut along one of three distinct planes, and the cut
surface in each case presents a very different appearance (Fig. 60). In
describing a given wood it is therefore customary to consider its
characteristics as they are shown in these three cuts or *sections*. An
ordinary "cross cut", at right angles to the length of the log, is known
as a *transverse* section, and shows the annual rings as a series of
concentric circles, with the wood rays running out from the center as
narrow lines along the radii. Where the cut is longitudinal and made
exactly along the radius of the log, a *radial* section results. This
presents the annual rings as vertical straight lines and the wood rays as
horizontal stripes or markings. Where the rays are fairly wide, as in the
oak, these markings are prominent and furnish the much-prized "silver
gain" so readily seen in quartered oak. Other longitudinal sections,
which do not lie in a plane passing through the center of the log, are
known as *tangential*. If the structure is exactly regular and the cut
exactly true, the annual rings are here seen as straight lines somewhat
unequally distant, running up and down along the wood. The irregularities
which almost always occur, however, cause the rings in such a cut to
appear as wavy lines which produce the common "grain" of most wood
surfaces. The rays are very inconspicuous in a tangential section, for
only their cut ends are visible. The relations between these three
sections, and the characteristic appearance of the various wood
structures as seen in them, is shown in the segment of an oak log (Fig.
61) and the magnified cube of the pine wood (Fig. 62).

Woods of verious species differ from one another markedly in such gross
characters as color, weight, hardness, chemical composition, width of
annual rings, width of rays, and number, size and arrangement of vessels;
and in such microscopic features as the size, shape, character, and
location of the different classes of wood-elements, the type and
distribution of pits, and the various markings on the cell-walls. The
structure of two distinct and their important woods, those of pine and of
oak, are well shown in their transverse, radial and tangential sections
in Figs. 63 and 64. The various details of wood structure remain so
constant that they may often be used to identify the plant species from
which a piece of wood has been derived. The great diversity which wood
displays, together with its abundance and the ease with which it can be
manipulated, have led to its use in numberless ways, and there is
consequently no other plant tissue, aside from those used as food, which
is of such great economic importance.

## The Ascent of Sap in Stems

We can determine by experiment that water and dissolved substances
absorbed by the roots are carried upward in the wood of the stem. As to
what causes this movement, however, there is still much question. To
explain the ascent of water in low-growing herbaceous plants might be
fairly simple, but the factors which bring about the lifting of water in
large quantites to the tops of tall trees, sometimes more than 300 feet
(100m) above the ground, are very hard to determine. An upward osmotic
pull is of course furnished by the increased sap concentration in the
leaf-cells which follows the water-loss therefrom in transpiration, but
even granting a strong pull at the leaf, the rise obviously cannot be due
to simple "suction" or atmospheric pressure. Nor is capillarity probably
concerned to any great extent in the process, for, although water may be
lifted very high in exceedingly small capillary tubes, its movement is so
slow under these conditions that capillarity certainly could not provide
the large amounts of water which we know much ascend the trunk daily.
Root-pressure, if it were strong enough, might perhaps be important, but
root-pressure is mainfest in woody plants only during the early spring
and is therefore lacking at the season when transpiration is most active.
It has been suggested that the living ray and wood parenchyma cells may
be concerned in the upward movement of water in some way, perhaps
furnishing a continuous series of osmotic pumps. These cells may be of
some such service, but we know that for a considerable time, at any rate,
water may ascend through a stem where all the living cells have been
killed. The post plausible hypothesis yet put forward is based on the
very high cohesive power exhibited by water under certain conditions. In
very thin water columns, such as must occur in the conducting cells of
the wood, this cohesive power is perhaps so strong that a pull at the top
- in this case the osmotic pull at the leaf - will lift the column
  bodily, as a rope might lifted. There are certain objections to this
explanation, too, but they are not as serious as in the other hypotheses.
Possibly several of the factors mentioned may be concerned together in
the ascent of sap. We must admit that this problem, like so many others
in biology, is as yet far from a satisfactory solution.

## The Translocation of Foods

The plant must possess means not only for insuring the passage of a
plentiful supply of water to the leaves through the wood of the stem,
petioles and veins, but also for transporting the product of the leafs
activity - the manufactured food in the form of carbohydrates; fats and
proteins - to any region of the plant where food is used or stored. This
function of translocation is performed chiefly by the sieve-tubes of the
bast. The movement of organic substances by diffusion from cell to cell
is a comparatively slow process, but is the only means available in
regions remote from the vascular system. Movement of food for long
distances, as from the leaf to the storage regions of stem and root,
seems to take place almost entirely in the bast. Here the protoplasmic
connectoins from sieve-tube to sieve-tube through the sieve-plates do
away with the necessity for diffusion through a long series of membranes
and thus facilitate the rapid transfer of substances from place to place.
This importance of the bast has repeatedly been demonstrated by
experiments involving "ringing" or "girdling", in which there is removed
from around the stem a continuous encircling strip of tissue, including
all bark and bast. It is a matter of common observation that a tree which
the trunk has been girdled in this way will ultimately die. Although
small in amount, therefore, and rather inconspicuous when compared with
wood, the bast is a vitally necessary tissue in the economy of the plant.
