# The Leaf and Its Functions

The vegetative organs of the plant naturally fall into two groups: The
root-system, situated in the soil and concerned primarily with the
absorption therefrom of water and certain nutrient materials; and the
stem and leaves (together called the *shoot*), which unfold in the air
and are concerned primarily with the manufacture of food, the raw
materials for which they derive from both air and soil. Of the two
members of the shootsystem the leaf is the primary and more important
one, the stem serving merely to expose the leaves to light and air and to
provide a means of communication between them and the rootsystem. It is
logical, therefore, for us to follow our study of the root with a study
of the leaf.

## The Structure of The Leaf

Before we can understand clearly the functions which the leaf performs,
we shall need to observe with some care its rather complicated structure.

### External Structure

Externally, the typical leaf consists of a broad, flat, and thin portion,
the *blade*, which is the seat of its important activities. This is green
is color and provided with a system of ribs or *veins* of stouter texture
than the rest of the tissue. The blade may sometimes be attached directly
to the stem, but is usually supported by a leaf-stalk or *petiole*, which
holds it out in a place favorable for the performance of its function and
serves as a highway for transportation of water and food between blade
and stem. At the base may be even, or it may be lobed or sometimes
actually divided into separate portions, the *leaflets*, in which state
the leaf is said to be *compound*. The margin is sometimes quite smooth,
but is more commonly broken into teeth of various sizes. The vein-system,
is either *parallel* where the veins run side by side with no conspicuous
branches; or *netted*, where they divide and anastomose repeatedly. The
petiole and stipules vary greatly in their development

### Internal Structure

Internally, the structure of the leaf is highly differentiated. A
transverse section cut at right angles to the surface of the blade
displays three important tissues: The *epidermus*, or protective
covering; the *mesophyll*, constituting the major portion of the leaf
substance, and the *veins*, each of which is a separate fibro-vascular
bundle and represents a final branch of the vascular system which runs
through root and stem.

The epidermis covers the entire leaf surface and is usually but one
cell-layer in thickness. Its cells are generally thin-walled and are
filled with a transparent cell-sap. Spread over the outside wall is a
thin, waxy, water-proofing layer, the *cuticle*, extending from cell to
cell and forming a continuous skin which covers the epidermis. It is
usually much thicker on the upper than on the lower surface of the leaf.
The epidermis is not an unbroken layer but is provided with minute
openings, the *stomata* (singular, *stoma*), through which an exchange of
gases between the tissues of the leaf and the outside air may take place.
These are much more numerous in the lower epidermis than in the upper,
and, indeed, are often absent from the latter altogether. Each stoma is a
slit-like pore formed by the pulling apart of two modified epidermal
cells, the *gaurd-cells*, which are unlike other cells of the epidermis
in containing chlorophyll. These guard-cells are so constructed that when
plump and turgid with water they tend to pull apart, thus enlarging the
opening. On becoming limp and partially collapsed, however, they spring
together again and close it. The degree of stomatal opening is thus
continually flucuating as the water supply of the guard-cells rises and
falls in response to changing internal or external conditions.

The mesophyll consists of tissue which is characteristically thin-walled,
soft, and green. The cytoplasm within its cells contains very small,
roundish bodies, denser than the rest of the living substance, and green
in color. These are the *chloroplasts* which contain within them the
green pigment *chlorophyll*, to which the characteristic color of foliage
is due. The mesophyll is not homogeneous tissue but in typical leaves is
divided into two main regions. That part lying next to the upper side of
the leaf is composed of cells which are elongated at right angles to the
leaf surface, packed rather closely together, and provided with a great
abundance of chloroplasts. This region is known as the *palisade layer*
and here is carried on most activity the process of food-manufacture or
photosynthesis. The lower region of the mesophyll consists of a mass of
cells which are so very irregular in shape that large air-spaces occur
between them, and a very loose, sponge-like tissue, the *spongy layer*,
is produced. These air-spaces communicate directly with the outside air
through the stomata. Chloroplasts are present in the spongy layer, but
not abundantly. Through the exposure to the air of a large area of
cell-surface, opportunity is provided in this portion of the mesophyll
for those has-exchanges which are continually taking place between the
leaf and the atmosphere, such as the absorption and excretion of both
carbon dioxide and oxygen, in the processes of the photosynthesis and
respiration, and the evaporation of water in the process of tranpiration.

Running through the blade are the fibro-vascular bundles or veins, the
channels by which the leaf tissues are kept in communication with the
rest of the plant. The main veins are stout, often projecting somewhat
below the lower surface of the blade. These break up into smaller and
smaller veins, and finally into minute veinlets which consist of only a
few cells. Each vein is surrounded by a *bundle-sheath* of heavy-walled
cells, to which most of its rigidity is due. Within this are two tissues:
The wood, consisting largely (as elsewhere in the plant body) of
elongated; water-conducting cells, the *tracheids* and *ducts*, which
distribute water and dissolved substances brought up through the stem
from the root; and the bast, consisting of especially modified, the
*sieve-tubes*, which collect from the mesophyll the food manufactured
there and convey it to the bast of the stem, along which it is
transported to other parts of the plant.

The petiole, usually circular in cross section, has within it a cylinder
or half-cylinder of fibro-vascular bundles which are continuous with the
main veins of the blade above and which enter directly into the vascular
cylinder of the stem below.

## Photosynthesis

The primary activity of green leaves is the *manufacture of food* from
certain simple inorganic materials - carbon dioxide and water - by energy
derived from light. This process of *photosynthesis* is fundamental in
organic nature, for it is of the utmost significance to animals and man,
because it constitutes the sole ultimate source of food in the world.
Food for living things. In the green parts of plants, and nowhere else
among organisms, is active or *kinetic* energy - in this case the energy
of light - converted into a latent or *potential* form, readily available
to living organisms for use in maintaining their vital activities; and,
moreover, in green plants alone are produced those fundamental organic
materials out of which plant and animal bodies are constructed. All the
complex metabolic changes which later take place in the organic world are
simply elaborations or simplifications of the primary products of
photosynthesis. A more detailed account of the various types of foods and
their uses, and of the energy-relations of the plant, will be given in
our chapter on Metabolism.

### Materials

The materials combined by the plant in this process are but two - water
and carbon dioxide. Water is absorbed from the soil by the roots, passes
upward through the stem, the petiole, and the veins of the leaf, and
thence enters the mesophyll cells. None is obtained by the leaf directly
from the atmosphere. It should be remembered that only a relatively small
portion of the water taken in by the plant is used in food-manufacture;
for much the larger part soon leaves the plant again, passing out of the
leaf into the air by transpiration. The carbon dioxide used in
photosynthesis is derived entirely from the air. Here it is always
present, but in such small quantities that it constitues only about three
parts in ten thousand of the atmosphere or three hundreths of 1%.
Experiments have shown that a higher concentration would be advantageous
to plant growth, since up to a certain point the rate of photosynthesis
rises if the proportion of carbon dioxide in the air is artificially
increased. It is through this comparatively rare gas alone that the plant
derives its supply of carbon, that element so vitally necessary to all
living organisms. No other carbon compounds, not even the abundant
supplies present in the complex organic materials of humus, can
apparently be drawn upon by ordinary green plants. Carbon, oxygen and
hydrogen, together with the seven essential elements derived from the
soil, constitute the necessary chemical basis for plant life.

### Mechanism

The mechanism or apparatus by which water and carbon dioxide are combined
is remarkable green pigment *chlorophyll*. This is present only in the
*chloroplasts*, portions of the cytoplasm slightly denser than the rest.
Chloroplasts may be few and large in certain lower plants but in the
higher ones are almost always small, numerous, and more or less spherical
in shape. They are most abundant in the palisade layer of the leaf. As to
chlorophyll itself we know comparatively little except that it is a
complex protein and contains magnesium. Iron is essential for its
production but apparently does not enter into the construction of the
substance itself. The presence of light is also necessary for the full
development of chlorophyll, as is shown by the pale color of leaves which
have grown in darkness. We are even more ignorant as to the manner in
which chlorophyll operates in bringing about the union of carbon dioxide
and water, nor have we yet succeeded in imitating this process in the
laboratory. We know, however, that chlorophyll does not contribute
material to the product formed and that it is not used up itself in the
process, and we may therefore infer that it acts somewhat as does a
catalyzer.

Associated with chlorophyll is usually another pigment or group of
pigments, yellow in color instead of green, to which the general terms
*xanthophyll* or *carotin* are ginven. These are not concerned with
photosynthesis and their function is poorly understood. To them are due
most of the yellow colors which occur in plants. Chlorophyll is a very
unstable compound and tends to break down quickly when extracted from the
leaf or when the leaf loses its vitality, but the yellow pigments are
much more resistant and often survive long after chlorophyll has
disintegrated.

### Energy

Energy is necessarily expended in the process of breaking up the
molecules of water and cabon dioxide and recombining their atoms into a
new compound. We know that this energy is derived not from heat, as in so
many cases, but entirely from *light*, which thus plays an essential part
in the physiology of plants. According to the most widely accepted
theory, light is due to minute and enormously rapid vibrations, the
length of the vibration - its *wave-length* - determining the color of
the light produced. Sunlight, or any white light, is composed of
vibrations of a great variety of different wave-lengths, but when such
light is passed through a prism these become sorted out into a
many-colored *spectrum*. The visible spectrum runs from red rays, the
wave-length of which is approximately 750 millionths of a millimeter, to
the violet ones, where it is approximately 400. These visible radiations
are by no means the only ones which occur, however. Rays of longer
wave-length than red - the infra-red rays - pass gradually into
heat-waves, and those shorter than violet - the ultra-violet rays - are
active chemically. When falling upon different objects, light behaves
differently. All of it may be absorbed by the object and converted into
heat or some other form of energy, the object then appearing black; or
all may be reflected, the object then appearing white; or certain
wave-lengths may be absorbed and certain others reflected, the object in
such a case displaying to oiur eyes the color of the light which it
reflects. We know, for example, that a green substance like chlorophyll
absorbs in general those wave-lengths which are not green and reflects
those which are green or greenish-yellow. We can determine more
accurately, however, the kind of light which is absorbed by a substance,
if we break up into a spectrum the light which has passed through that
substance. Such a spectrum displays perfectly dark regions, or
*absorption bands*, in those portions which correspond to the particular
kinds or wave-lengths of light which the substance has absorbed. The
absorption spectrum of chlorophyll shows a narrow, sharp, black band in
the orange-red and a wider, less definite one in the blue, thus
indicating that it is chiefly these two kinds of light which chlorophyll
absorbs, and suggesting that the red and blue rays in sunlight, and no
others, furnish the energy used in the process of photosynthesis.
Chlorophyll possesses the remarkable power of utilizing energy from this
source in the manufacture of food, an ability that is unique in the
organic world.

The intensity as well as the character of the light affects the rate at
which photosynthesis proceeds. The process begins at illuminations of
very low intensity, reaches its maximum at about that of bright diffuse
daylight, and decreases again in light which is so bright as to injure
protoplasm. Photosynthesis may be readily accomplished in artificial
light of the proper intensity and wave-lengths.

Given a supply of the necessary raw materials, a sufficient temperature,
the presence of chlorophyll, and light of proper character and intensity,
photosynthesis may go on anywhere in the plant. Although these conditions
are preeminently fulfilled in the mesophyll of the leaves, they may also
be present to a lesser extent in petioles, stipules, calyx-lobes, and
other organs, thus insuring a utilization of these regions to produce a
small supplementary food supply.

### Products

Let us now turn from a consideration of the necessary conditions for
photosynthesis to a study of its products. The details of the process
whereby carbon dioxide unites with water are not yet known, but the
formation of formaldehyde (CH2O) id perhaps one the the preliminary
steps. The first product which can be recognized, however, and a
substance which is therefore of unique interest, is *glucose* or *grape
sugar*, C6H12O6, formed according to the following equation:

`6CO2 + 6H2O = C6H12O6 + 6O2`

Glucose is present in the sap of practically all plant cells. It is the
fundamental carbohydrate and the basis for all other foods; and from it
are ultimately derived, through the action of enzymes and by various
additions and chemical modifications, all the organic compounds of plants
and animals.

The presence of a large amount of sugar in a chlorophyll-bearing cell
results in a stoppage of its manufacture there, and is disadvantageous
for other reasons. We find, accordingly, that before photosynthesis has
long continued, the resulting sugar becomes converted into another type
of carbohydrate, *starch* (C6H10O5)n (n stands for the unknown number of
smaller molecules which are united into one of the large and complex ones
of such a substance of starch). Starch is complex and insoluble, occuring
in minute but definite bodies or *grains*, the size, shape and markings
of which are characteristic and constant in any plant species. The starch
molecule is very large - just how large we do not know - and is derived
through the combination of many glucose molecules, with the liberation of
a molecule of water from each, thus:

`nC6H12O6 - nH2O = (C6H10O5)n`

Neither sugar nor starch are accumulated in very great quantities in the
leaf-blade, for most of the products of photosynthesis are removed
shortly after their production to those regions of the plant where they
are to be used or stored.

### By-Product

In the recombination of the atoms of carbon dioxide and water out of
which glucose is produced there is evidently a surplus of oxygen, and we
find this oxygen given of as a by-product of photosynthesis, passing
forth into the air continually from green plants during daylight. This is
of little significance to the plant itself but is often important to
other organisms.

Photosynthesis is, therefore, c constructive process by which the food of
the plant is manufactured from very simple inorganic materials, through
the agency of the characteristic substance chlorophyll, and by energy
derived from light. The significance of photosynthesis lies in the fact
that it is the only process among living things whereby organic compounds
are built up from simple inorganic substances, with the resultant storage
of energy. All other chemical changes in plants and animals are concerned
either with the transformation of one type of organic material into
another or with the breaking down of complex organic compounds into
simpler ones. Photosynthesis alone is fundamentally constructive, and the
activity of green plants thus underlies that of all other organisms.

## Transpiration

The lower portion of the mesophyll, or the spongy layer, is not concerned
primarily with photosynthesis but with the interchange of gases between
plant and atmosphere. Notable among these interchanges is the evaporation
of water from the tissues and its passage into the air, a process which
we know as *transpiration*.

### The Importance of Water

The water-relations of a plant are of the utmost importance to it and
profoundly influence its structure and activities. We have seen that
water constitutes the major portion (75-90%) of plant tissues in general,
and a very much larger share of protoplasm itself. An sbundance of water
keeps the cells plump by maintaining the turgidity of the tissues,
enables the soft parts of the plant to preserve their firmness and to
function successfully. Water is one of the raw materials entering into
the process of photosynthesis. It is the solvent of the mineral
nutrients, which can enter the plant and move about within it only when
in solution, and in watery solutions all the important physiological
processes of the plant take place. The maintenance of an abundant supply
of water in its tissues is therefore essential for the life and growth of
the plant.

To this end the primary requisites are evidently the presence of a
sufficient amount of available water in the soil and its abundant
absorption therefrom by the roots. Of no less significance in the
water-relations of the plant is the process by which this water
evaporates from the plant tissues and passes into the air. Absorption
must equal or exceed transpiration if the plant is to thrive, for should
there be a deficiency in income or an excess of outgo, a shortage of
water will result in the tissues, and the plant will suffer accordingly.

Only a very small fraction of the water which enters the root-hairs and
passes upward to the leaves takes part in the manufacture of sugar. The
remainder becomes distributed through the cells of the spongy layer and
evaporates from their moistened walls, departing through the stomata as
water vapor. A smaller amount may be evaporated directly from the surface
of the epidermal cells. During the growing season a constant stream of
water is thus passing through the plant body, entering at the root-hairs
and leaving through the stomata. The total quantity of this water often
amounts to several hundred times as much as the final dry weight of the
plant itself.

### The Rate of Transpiration

The rate of water-loss varies greatly according to the kinds of plant,
the soil conditions, the season of the year, the time of day, and various
environmental factors. As a general rule, we find that the rate tends to
increase under conditions which favor increased evaporation, such as high
temperature, bright light, rapid air movement and low humidity; and to
decrease under environments of the opposite character.

Transpiration is by no means controlled entirelly by factors which
influence evaporation alone. The rate of water-loss from a given
leaf-surface and from an equal area of free water do not rise and fall
exactly together, the transpiration from the living leaf sometimes being
relatively higher and sometimes relatively lower. There must, therefore,
be factors in the leaf itself (as opposed to those in the external
environment) which tend to accelerate or to retard transpiration. The
most important of thses is doubtless the opening and closing of the
stomata, which we have already discussed. Changes in the concentration of
the sap in the mesophyll cells also probably determine to some extent the
rate at which water evaporates from their surfaces.

The actual amount of water transpired during the growing season may be
large or small, depending on the size of the plant, its leaf-area, its
transpiration-rate, and the moisture and fertility of the soil. Of most
significance to the plant, however, is not the actual bulk of
transpiration, but the efficiency with which the water is used. This is
determined by comparing the weight of the total water transpired with the
weight of the dry plant material ultimately produced, their quotient
being known as *water-requirement* of the plant. Thus when we say that
the water-requirement of corn under certain conditions is 400, we mean
that for every gram of dry weight of corn plant produced at maturity,
there have been transpired through its leaves 400 grams of water. Species
vary markedly in their water-requirement, and so do plants of the same
species when grown under different conditions.

### The Significance of Transpiration

Excessive water-loss is an ever-present danger to land plants, and many
structural modifications have been developed by various species, or may
appear in particular individuals growing under dry conditions, which tend
to reduce this loss. The question therefore arises as to whether
transpiration is an unmixed evil, made necessary by the fact that the
stomata must be open to allow the exchange of gases which take place in
photosynthesis; or whether it is really a function of the leaf and
performs a useful part in the plants economy. It was long thought that
water must be taken in through the roots in large quantities to insure an
abundant absorption of nutrient materials from the soil, but a fuller
understanding of the phenomena of osmosis and root absorption shows the
fallacy of this conclusion. It has also been contended that transpiration
is useful in concentrating the very dilute solutions of nutrient salts
take from the soil - "boiling them down", so to speak. We have seen,
however, that the factors which preclude such an explanation; and,
indeed, experiment shows that the amount of salts absorbed is practically
independent of the amount of water transpired. Transpiration from the
leaves, however, is evidently what causes the *transpiration stream*, or
continuous movement of water from root to leaf through the lifeless ducts
in the wood of the stem. We shall consider this movement more fully when
discussing the functions of the stem; but it is well to note here that by
this stream the dissolved substances are transported bodily from the
central cylinder of the root upward throughout the plant as far as
ramifications of the dead conducting elements of the wood extend. This
movement is probably far more rapid than would result through diffusion
from cell to cell, and in tall plants, particularly, the transpiration
stream probably performs a distinct service in distributing rapidly
throughout the plant the supply of nutrient materials absorbed from the
soil.

Transpiration is also of distinct usefulness in regulating the
temperature of the leaf. The blade absorbs much more energy than it uses
in photosynthesis, particularly in bright light; and the excess, as heat,
would sometimes raise the temperature of the tissues dangerously, were it
not absorbed in evaporating water from the mesophyll cells.

Transpiration is carried on primarily in the leaves, but may occur in any
other organs which are exposed to the air. Excessive loss of water is
often prevented in such regions by the development of cell layers with
corky walls.


