# Pruning

Deadheading, disbudding, pinching back, heading back, cutting back and
thinning are all necessary pruning techniques. These chores will
encourage plants to bloom for longer periods of time and improve overall
plant apperance and health.

## Deadheading - Removing Spent or old Flowers

Annual plants will produce many flowers throughout the growing season
without much maintenance, while perennial flowering plants only flower
for a two to three week period. However, they will both bloom more
profusely over a longer period of time if they are deadheaded regularly.
Deadheading is removing old or spent flowers by cutting or pinching
flowers off. This practice helps extend the flowering season by
stimulating plants to continue flowering. Annual plants must complete
their life cycle in one growing season, from seed germination and plant
growth to flowering and seed production. Removing flowers from both
annuals and perennials before seeds form, at least every five to seven
days, will interrupt this natural progression, preventing them from
setting seeds, and stimulating the plant to try again and complete the
process. Be aware that only specific perennials will rebloom or have a
prolonged bloom time when deadheaded and that sometimes the second flush
will produce fewer, smaller blooms. Also, allowing a plant to go to seed,
or form seeds, will drain energy from it, not only resulting in less
flowers, but a decreased growth rate and smaller leaves.

## Disbudding - Removing Side Buds

Gardeners who want their plants to produce a limited number of large
flowers rather than numerous small ones should disbud their plants.
Instead of cutting off mature spent flowers, disbudding is the process of
removing young side buds and leaving the one terminal bud. The purpose
for this is to direct the plants energy toward inducing one, or sometimes
a few buds, to grow into very large flowers. Plants should be disbudded
when lateral buds are large enough to handle, which is about the size of
a pea.

## Pinching

No matter if the plants are started at home or grown by a professional,
they should be pinched back. Pinching removes the terminal bud, or the
tip of the vegetative shoot, along with the first set of leaves. It is
only necessary to use fingers or a fingernail to remove this portion of
the stem since it is often soft and fleshy. Although some potential
blooms are sacrificed, plants that are pinched back will produce even
more flowers during the growing season. Once a plant is pinched, new
lateral stems will grow from the stem that was pinched and each of these
lateral stems usually sets flower buds. Pinching also prevents some
herbaceous plants from growing tall and spindly, by maintaining a compact
form and increasing flower numbers, and can help shape plants if a few
stems have grown longer than surrounding stems, Chrysanthemums
(*Chrysanthemum spp.*), for example. Pinching can also be used to stagger
bloom time and produce a constant bloom effect. To achieve this, it will
be necessary to pinch one-third of the stems during one session and
another one-third of stems each week for two more weeks. Make sure that
you do not pinch one-third of the stems on only one side of the plant,
rather evenly pinch plants on all sides so that flowering is uniform.

## Heading Back

Plants that look straggly or overgrown are good candidates for heading
back. Heading back should remove stems to just above a lateral bud
(approximately one-fourth to one-half inch (0.635-1.27 cm) above the
bud). The newly trimmed plant should have a natural appearance as opposed
to a sheared, formal look. Since these buds will emerge at different
points on the stems, the shape and size of the plant and the direction of
new growth can be somewhat controlled by the location of the bud that is
left at the end of the cut. Heading back can stimulate development of
smaller shoots and buds lower on the stem, resulting in denser growth.
To be effective, only a small percentage, for example 25% of the top
growth, should be removed from perennials in a single season. Heading
back in combination with thinning will also help control the stimulation
of new, dense growth.

## Thinning Perennial (two year) Plant Stems

Thinning perennial plant stems is the process of removing one-third of
the plants stems at ground level when the plant is one-fourth to
one-third of its mature size. After plants are thinned, the space between
stems increases, and the overall plant is less dense. Thinning a plant
has many of the following benefits.

```
* Increase air circulation and light levels between stems to prevent
mildew, other diseases, and insects from infecting and infesting plants.
An increased light level and air movement will also promote better
branching interior stems.
* Remove weak or thin stems to make plants sturdier
* Shape a plant to give it a more attractive and less crowded appearance
* Thinning may increase flower size, as with disbudding, since more of
the plants energy will be directed toward fewer buds
* Plants are rejuvenated by new stem growth replacing stems that were
removed
```

## Cutting Back

Cutting back the entire top of a declining perennial to the ground or
near ground level will promote vigorous new growth. This technique can
even extend the life of certain perennials, for example Coreopsis
(*Coreopsis grandiflora 'Badengold' and C. lanceolata*) that flower
themselves to exhaustion, and rejuvenate them. Cutting back can even
stagger flowering if stems are cut back at weekly intervals. This
technique is also done at different times of the growing seasons for
different purposes. Cutting back before flowering will help with height
control and stagger flowering if one-third of the stems are cut back
during one session and another one-third are cut back each week for two
more weeks. Cutting back can also enhance the over presence of a plant.
For example, Canary Grass (*Phalaris* spp.) often looks tattered,
discolored, and word out by mid-summer. Cutting back will promote new,
vigorous healthy growth for a good late-season foliage show. Cutting back
after flowering is used for maintenance, by preventing plants from
becoming woody or lanky, and can encourage new growth and sometimes new
blooms. Perennials that flower at different times during the spring and
summer will have different requirements for cutting back after they
flower. For all perennials that are cut back, they should be fertilized
and watered well to encourage new growth and flowers. Any new growth will
be shorter than the stems that where cut back, and flowers may be smaller
than previous ones.

## Sanitation

Whichever pruning activity is being used, flowers and other plant
material should be picked up off the ground because they could eventually
encourage diseases such as botrytis. Constant high humidity next to moist
soil on warm days, lack of air movement around closely set plants,
coupled with decaying of diseased plant material makes conditions
favorable for the spread of disease. If gardeners neglect to clean up
plant debris, fungus may begin to grow and plants may start to rot at the
base from the infection. By then, it is usually too late to save the
infected plant. Although, if the plant is removed immediately, along with
any other infected leaves, stems, and flowers, then damage may be
limited. So, to discourage disease and the problems that will surely
follow, it is well worth the extra effort for gardeners to practice
sanitation by keeping the ground free of debris and removing bad and
damaged foliage and flowers from plants.

# Source

https://extension.psu.edu/pruning-herbaceous-plants
