# Botany

The science of plants. Botany is divided into various sub-divisions:
systemic botany, plant morphology, and plany phsiology are the most
notable.

## Systematic Botany (aka *plant taxonomy*)

Systematic botany deals with names and classifications of plants. Its
object is to identify by name and description all the kinds of plants
which can be distinguished, and to arrange them, according to their
natural relationships, into those groups which we call species, genera,
families and orders. Since these relationships can be determined only
after a knowledge of evolutionary history, the science of *Plant
Phylogeny*, which endeavors to trace the genealogy of the plant kingdom,
is an important adjunct to systematic botany.

## Plant Morphology

Plant morphology deals with the form and structure of plants. Its object
is to descibe the construction and organization of the plant body and to
trace underlying similarities in form between various plant groups. Under
morphology are included *Anatomy*, dealing with internal structures in
general; *Histology*, with the more minute internal structures;
*Cytology*, with the structure of the cell; *Embryology*, with the
development of the individual, and *Experimental Morphology*, with the
causes which determine form and structure..

## Plant Physiology

Plant physiology deals with the functions of plants. Its objects are
to describe and explain the various activities by which the life of the
plant is maintained and transmitted to its offspring. Physiology
obviously underlies the other sub-divisions of botany since it touches
the very process of living. A branch of physiology particularly active
today is *Genetics*, which deals with the problems of inheritance.

---

Aside from these three major sub-sciences there are other fields of
botany which deserve mention. *Plant Ecology* is concerned with the
relations between plants and the various factors of their environment
such as soil, climatic conditions and living organisms; and, in
particular, with the modifications of structure and function which enable
them to react successfully to changes in their surroundings. Ecology
necessarily involves both morphology and physiology, as well as certain
of the physical sciences. *Plant Geography* is concerned with the
geographical distribution of plants, and is intimately related both to
systematic botany and to ecology, as well as to geology and geography.
*Palaeobotany* is concerned with the structure and relationships of
fossil plants, and thus touches systematic botany, morphology, and
geology.

In addition to all these aspects of botany, most of which are theoretical
rather than practical in their bearing, we should not fail to mention the
great group of sciences concerned with the utilization and culture of
plants. *Economic Botany*, in its narrower sense, is a study of those
plants which are valuable to man and of the uses to which they are put.
The various sciences commonly grouped under Agriculture (*Soil Science*,
*Agronomy*, *Horticulture*, *Plant Pathology*, and many others) together
with *Forestry*, *Pharmacology* and their subsidiaries, are eminently
practical, and their close relationship to botany is sometimes
overlooked. They are nevertheless integral parts of our science, and for
their successful pursuit demand a sound knowledge of botanical
principles. *Everyone who is concerned with plants from a scientific point
of view, whatever his purpose or profession, is rightfully to be called
a* ***botanist***.

---

## History


### The Classical Period

Botany as we know it today is the result of a long term of observation
and inquiry. As do so many other sciences, it looks back to the fertile
speculations of the Greeks for the first definite expression of its
problems and principles. The "nature" of plants was studied by [Aristotle
(384-322 B.C.)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aristotle) who saw clearly
certain of the broader problems of plant and animal life, and whose
sagacious comments thereon are still worthy of our attention. It is his
disciple [Theophrastus of Eresus (371-287
BC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theophrastus), however, whom botanists
have generally regarded as the father of their science. This keen
naturalist accumulated a great mass of information with regard to plants
and discussed their various characteristics. Rome also had her share in
the development of plant science, notably through the contributions of
[Pliny the Elder (23-79
AD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pliny_the_Elder), whose "Natural
History" a compendium of facts and fancies about living things, was long
a storehouse of botanical information.
[Dioscorides](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedanius_Dioscorides), living
at about the time of Nero, studied plants for their medicinal properties
and holds an important place historically in both botany and medicine.

### The Herbalists

After this, its classical period, botany went into that profound eclipse
suffered by all sciences during the Middle Ages. The teachings of the
ancient masters were jealously preserved and were commented upon and
dissected, but the thought of extending knowledge by direct observation
and experiment was held to be almost sacrilegious. About the beginning of
the sixteenth century, however, a group of open-minded men living in the
Rhine valley and its adjacent regions undertook to explore the plant
kingdom afresh for themselves. They were interested in plants chiefly for
the curative virtues to be found therein, and, paying scant attention to
the doctrines and dogmas of the ancients, they went about describing and
drawing with fidelity the various kinds of plants which flourished their
native countries. From the numerous herb-books or "Herbals" in which the
resulting discoveries were published, these pioneers have been known as
the "Herbalists". They endeavored to distinguish clearly the different
species from one another, and proposed certain crude methods of
classifying the plant kingdom. So unprejudiced and free from conventional
dogmatism of the age was their whole attitude that the Herbalists are
generally regarded as the fathers of modern botany.

### The Modern Period

The first extensive and thorough classification of plants was that
proposed in 1583 by the Italian botanist [Cesalpino
(1519-1603)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrea_Cesalpino). Combining
an acquaintance with the ancients and an intimate first-hand knowledge of
plants, he laid down certain principles which were the basis of
systematic botany for many years. Modern taxonomy, however, dates from
the publication of the "Species Plantarum" by the great Swedish
naturalist [Linnaeus
(1707-1778)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Linnaeus), in 1753. In
this monumental book all the plant species known at that time were named,
carefully described, and arranged according to a definite system.

Although the early work in botany was thus concerned chiefly with
taxonomy, the study of plant structures was not neglected [Grew
(1628-1711)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nehemiah_Grew) in England, and
[Malpighi (1628-1694)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcello_Malpighi)
in Italy, were keenly interested in the internal construction of the
plant body, and their works on "phytotomy" laid the foundation for our
modern knowledge of plant morphology. The continued improvement in the
compound microscope made possible more complete and accurate knowledge of
the way plants are constructed, and led to the formation by
[Schleiden](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matthias_Jakob_Schleiden), in
1838, of the Cell Theory, which states that the cell is the unit of
structure in plants and that protoplasm is its essential constituent.
From this beginning, modern anatomy and cytology have added a great body
of facts to our knowledge of the structure, growth, and reproduction of
the plant body.

The ancients and early modern botanists for the most part had fanciful
and inaccurate ideas as to the way in which the plant had carried on its
various functions, an ignorance largely due to the undeveloped state of
the sciences of physics and chemistry at the time. It was not until the
latter part of the eighteenth century that modern plant physiology became
definitely established. Oxygen was discovered by
[Priestly](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Priestley) in 1774, and
five years later a Dutch physician,
[Ingenhousz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jan_Ingenhousz), observed that
green plants in the light take in carbon dioxide and give off oxygen, and
that all plants give off a certain amount of carbon dioxide. These gas
exchanges were accurately measured by [de
Saussure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicolas_Th%C3%A9odore_de_Saussure)
in the early years of the nineteenth century, and some of the important
facts of plant physiology thus became established. Since that time the
development of modern chemistry and physics has made possible a steady
advance in our knowledge of the physiological processes of living things.

The publication of the "Origin of Species" by [Charles
Darwin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Darwin) in 1859 resulted in
a general acceptance among scientists of the theory of evolution. A
recognition of the fact that the plants of today have been slowly
developed from simpler ancestors has had a profound effect upon botanical
science and has stimulated a great interest in reconstructing the "family
tree" of the plant kingdom and establishing a really "natural" system of
classification, based on actual relationship, to replace the artificial
systems of Linnaeus and his predecessors. It has led also to a more
intensive study of the laws of variation and inheritance, and the causes
and method of evolution. This has been encouraged still further by the
discovery of [Mendels Law of
Inheritance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mendelian_inheritance),
propounded in 1866, disregarded for many years, and finally brought to
the attention of biologists again in 1900.

The present state of the science of botany, then, is the result of a long
period of slow development, in which truth has been gradually separated
from error and our present vast store of facts amassed. With each
advance, new questions have arisen and new fields of investigation have
opened, until the science has broadened from a mere discussion of the
names and properties of medicinal herbs to an attack upon the fundamental
problems of life itself.

---

## Further Readings

* [Introductory Survey](intro-survey)
* [Soil](soil)
* [The Root and Its Functions](root-and-its-functions)
* [The Leaf and Its Functions](leaf-and-its-functions)
* [The Stem and Its Functions](stem-and-its-functions)
* [Reproduction](reproduction)
* [Pruning](pruning)

---

All information is sourced from `Botany: Principles and Problems` by [Edmund
W. Sinnot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmund_Ware_Sinnott), unless otherwise specified.
