# The Root and Its Functions

The portion of the plant most intimately related to the soil is the root.
This organ has two major functions - to anchor the plant firmly and to
abosrb water and certain important nutrient materials from the soil.
Beyond this, the root often serves as a storage reservoir for food, and
may perform various other functions.

## External Structure

The most common type of root is a rather slender and profusely branched
structure, penetrating the soil in all directions and forming a *fibrous*
root-system. Its advantages for anchorage and absorption are obvious.
Somewhat less common are types which possess a single main root or
*tap-root*, penetrating deeply into the soil and much stouter than the
*lateral roots* which arise from it. Tap-roots lend themselves readily to
storage purposes and frequently become large and fleshy. The root-systems
of many plants are intermediate between these two main types. Others may
sometimes depart radically from the normal forms in response to certain
special and unusual functions which they have assumed.

## The Absorbing Region

Absorption of water and nutrient material is carried on only by the
younger portions of the root, near its tip. The very tip itself is
covered with a sheathing *root-cap* of cells, which protects the delicate
underlying tissues as the root pushes its way through the soil. Back of
this is a short region of growth, the only place where elongation of the
root occurs. Behind this, in turn, is the absorbing region, a somewhat
longer zone the surface of which is covered with thousands of exceedingly
delicate filaments, the *root-hairs*. Each hair is an elongated
projection growing out from one of the surface cells of the root, its
sap-cavity and lining of cytoplasm being continuous with those of the
root-cell of which it forms a part. The root-hair may reach a length of
several millimeters and force its way into the minute crevices of the
soil, thus coming into most intimate contact with the soil particles.
Through the enormous surface which these root-hairs expose to the soil,
absorption of water and mineral salts takes place. Root-hairs are
generally short-lived, dying away as the corky bark begins to appear. A
root-hair zone of fairly constant length thus follows behind the growing
root-tip, new hairs appearing in its younger portion to replace the
oldest ones, which are continually dying away.

## The Plant Cell

The root-hair (including its basal portion) is a plant *cell*. Since a
knowledge of the structure and functions of cells is obviously
essential if we are to understand how the root-hair is constructed and
does its work, or, indeed, how any other part of the plant is put
together and functions, it will be nevessary at this point, before we
discuss the physiology of the root, to describe briefly some of the most
important characteristics of cells in general and of plant cells in
particular.

We have already spoken of that remarkable living material which is called
*protoplasm*, the seat of all the various activities which are maintained
in animals and plants, and the only portion of their bodies which is
truly *alive*. Physically, protoplasm is a thin, jelly-like, colloidal
substance, but its minute structure is not clearly known. Chemically, it
is a mixture of very complex proteins and is thus composed chiefly of
carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen. Protoplasm is the "physical
basis" of all life and the most extraordinary material known to man.

The protoplasm of the plant body is not a directly continuous mass but is
broken up into minute parts, the *cells* or *protoplasts*, each of which
is a distincy and more or less independent unit, possessing a definite
structure and carrying on within itself a variety of physiological
processes. Around the cell the protoplasm secretes a dead *cell-wall*
composed of the characteristic plant substance *cellulose*. This is firm
in texture but easily penetrated by water. The protoplasm of the cell has
two distinct portions - the *nucleus*, a dense, somewhat spherical body
which appears to be the directive center for the cells activities; and
the *cytoplasm*, thinner and more watery in texture, which lines the
inner surface of the wall in a tenuous layer and is bounded, without and
within, by a very delicate membrane. Embedded in the cytoplasm frequently
appear small, somewhat denser bodies, the *plastids*. These perform
special functions, such as carrying on the manufacture of food, building
up starch-grains or producing colors. In many cases it has been shown
that the cytoplasm is not passive immobile, but that within it a slow,
streaming movement often takes place. In mature cells, the entire central
portion of the cell is occupied by a *sap-cavity* or *vacuole*, filled
with water in which various substances are dissolved, and surrounded
externally by the layer of cytoplasm. A typical plant cell may thus
perhaps be likened roughly to an inflated football or basketball, the
firm leathery covering corresponding to the cell-wall; the thin inner
bladder of rubber, tightly pressed against it, to the layer of cytoplasm;
and the air-space to the sap-cavity. A comparison to an automobile tire,
with its stout shoe or casing, its delicate inner tube, and its central
air-cavity, might also be made.

Cells are normally very small objects, averaging about .01 mm in
diameter, and varying widely in shape and character according to the
function which each performs, whether this be support, absorption,
conduction, storage, protection, food-manufacture, growth, or
reproduction. The plant body is composed of a multitude of cells, bound
firmly together by cementing substances to form an entire, coherent
organism. As we consider the various tissues and organs in detail, we
shall have occasion to describe the particular characteristics which
their cells display.

## Internal Structure of Roots

The epidermis of the root, like that of all other plant organs, is a
single layer of cells in thickness. These cells are normally protective
in function, but in the root-hair zone many of them produce on their
outer surface a characteristic projection, the root-hair itself.

The cortex lies just under the epidermis and is of varying thickness. In
the young root, its cells serve to transmit water and dissolved
substances from root-hair to fibro-vascular cylinder, and, in the older
roots, to store food. Most of the fleshy portion of storage-roots
consists of enlarged cortex. The innermost layer of cortical cells is
often especially modified and is then known as the *endodermis*.

The fibro-vascular cylinder occupies the core of the root, furnishing
mechanical strength and serving as a highway for conduction. As in other
organs of the plant, it is composed of two main tissues, the *wood* or
*xylem* and the *bast* or *phloem*. The wood, which forms the central
axis of this cylinder, is usually star-shaped in cross section and is
composed for the most part of thick-walled and much elongated dead cells,
the walls of which have become woody. It provides rigidity for the root
and conducts upward the water and dissolved substances which enter from
the soil. Between the points of the star are patches of bast, formed of
thin-walled cells which transport manufactured food upward and downward.

In older roots the fibro-vascular cylinder, particularly as to its woody
portion, increases greatly in thickness through the activity of a growing
zone or *cambium*, just as does the stem; and a corky bark is usually
developed on the outside.

## Diffusion and Osmosis

The most important function of the root is to absorb from the soil the
water and mineral substances needed for the plants life and growth. This
involved the physical processes of *diffusion* and *osmosis*, a
consideration of which is necessary before we can understand clearly this
primary activity of the root.

### Diffusion

Diffusion may be defined as the tendency of any substance, when it
occurs as a gas or in solution, to become evenly distibuted throughout
the whole space available to it by moving from points of greater to
points of lesser concentration. Its operation is familiar in the
diffusion of odors, for the minute particles given off by any strongly
scented substance will move outward rapidly, even in perfectly still air,
and will soon become equally distinquishable in all directions from their
point of origin. Two gases liberated within a closed space soon diffuse
throughout its whole extent and become thoroughly mixed. In the same way,
a crystal of salt dissolved in a vessel of water will in time have its
molecules dispersed so uniformly, even though the liquid is free from
moving currents, that samples taken from any part of the contents of the
vessel will be salt solutions of exactly the same strength. This constant
tendency toward diffusion is explained by the fact that in gases and
liquids the molecules are in very active movement, continually striking
against one another and rebounding. There are obviously fewest
collisions, and thus most frequent opportunity for unobstructed movement,
in those directions where there are fewest molecules, and in such
directions a dispersal of the molecules therefore necessarily takes place
until they are present everywhere in uniform abundance. The principle of
diffusion is operative in so many of the physiological processes of
plants that it must be thoroughly grasped if these processes are to be
understood.

When two liquids are separated by a membrane through which they can pass,
diffusion between them will still take place. Such diffusion through a
membrane is called *osmosis*, and it tends to continue (if the
permeability of the membrane allows) until the composition of the liquids
on both sides of the membrane is the same. If a solution of salt in
water, for example, is present on one side and pure water on the other,
the salt will tend to diffuse through the membrane until its
concentration is the same throughout. It is important to note that the
*concentration* (the amount of substance dissolved per unit of volume)
rather than the total amount of the substance or the bulk of the
solution, is the factor which determines the direction and rate of
diffusion. It is by diffusion through the cytoplasmic membranes of the
root-hair that mineral salts in the soil solution enter the plant. This
inward movement of any given salt will continue so long as its
concentration is greater in the soil water than in the sap of the
root-hair.

### Osmotic Movement of Solvents

This phenomenon of osmosis that is complicated, however, by the fact that
the dissolving liquid or *solvent* (water in ithis case) as well as the
dissolved substance will pass through the membrane, and by the remarkable
circumstance that where such movement occurs, it is always more rapid in
one direction that in the other. Experiment has shown that if two
solutions of different densities (or a solution and purse water) are
separated by a membrane, *a movement of water take place from the less
concentrated to the more concentrated solution*, and tends to continue
till both are of the same density; and that the rate of this movement is
proportional to the difference in concentration. The more concentrated
solution will therefore tend to expand through this access of water, and,
if it is confined within a closed space, a pressure, often of
considerable magnitude, will develop.

As to why such a movement of water occurs no complete agreement of
opinion yet exists, for the process of osmotic interchange involves some
of the less clearly understood phenomena of physical chemistry. We may
assume that the dissolved substance has an affinity or attractive power
for water, and that this attraction increases with the concentration of
the substance; or that the molecular movement of water molecules, so that
where there is little material in solution the water molecules strike the
membrane and pass through it oftener than they can where much material is
in solution; or we may regard the whole phenomenon as really a
manifestation of the fundamental principle of diffusion, since the
tendency is for the solutions on both sides of the membrane of to become
equal in concentration, although this is here brought about a movement of
the dissolving liquid as well as of the dissolved substance itself. None
of these explanations is entirely satisfactory, but they may perhaps help
to picture the process more clearly to our minds. The essential fact
remains that water will pass through a membrane *toward the denser
solution*, explain it as we may; and upon this fact depends the power of
the plant to withdraw water from the soil.

### Permeability of the Membrane

Thus far, we have assumed that both thedissolved substance and water may
pass with perfect freedom through the membrane, or that the membrane is
*permeable* to them. All osmotic membranes are readily permeable to
water, but we find that they differ markedly in the ease with which
dissolved substances of various sorts can diffuse through them. One
membrane may be perfectly permeable to a given substance; another may
allow it to pass slowly and with difficulty, and another may exclude it
altogether. Nor does even the same membrane display an equal degree of
permeability to all substances, for some may pass through it easily,
others with difficulty, and others not at all. To what these differences
in permeability are due we do not know, but they are presumably caused by
the relations between the structure of the membrane and the size and
character of the molucules of the dissolved substance.

A membrane which allows water to diffue through it but does not allow a
given dissolved substance to do so is called *semi-permeable*, and it is
a highly important biological fact that all membranes in living cells
seem to belong to this class. The membrane of a root-hair cell, for
example, allows water to pass readily but is impermeable to such
substances as sugar, which are dissolved in the sap solution. The cell is
thus able not only to retain these valuable materials within itself,
unwasted by outward diffusion, but to use them as a permanent means of
drawing in osmotically a supply of water from the soil, since their
presence within the root-hairs normally maintains the sap of these cells
at a higher concentration than the adjacent soil solution. This same
membrane, however, is permeable to most of the mineral salts present in
the soil, which are thus able to diffuse readily into the root-hair.

### Other Principles of Osmotic Action

Before we attempt to apply the principles of osmosis to the living plant,
however, we should fix clearly in mind certain facts with regard to
osmotic phenomena in general about which confusion frequently arises.
*First*, substances which are not soluable or which for any reason are
not in solution *cannot diffuse* and have no osmotic effect whatever.
Sugar, for instance, is soluble and is osmotically active, but the moment
it is converted into stach, which is an insoluble substance, it loses its
osmotic effect entirely. *Second*, the osmotic strength of a solution,
and consequently its power to attact water, is determined not by the
chemical nature of the dissolved substances but by the total
concentration of material, of whatever kind, which is in solution. A
solution of sugar, one of salt, one of a mixture of the two, or one
containing half a dozen substances, may all have exactly the same osmotic
concentration. *Third*, the diffusion of water through a membrane and the
diffusion of salts through the same membrane occur *quite independently
of one another*. Water will move through a membrane from a solution of
lesser to a solution of greater total concentration, but a dissolved
substance, following the general law of diffusion, will pass from a point
where that substance is abundant to one where it is scarce, always
providing that the membrane is permeable to it. Given the proper
conditions, it is quite possible for a dissolved substance to pass
through a memberane osmotically with no movement of water taking place at
all, or for water to move without a movement of dissolved subtances in
the other. *Fourth*, if there is more than one substance in solution,
each will tend to diffuse quite independently of all others. Differences
in the concentration of each substance, *considered by itself*, are what
determine the rate and direction of diffusion of that substance.

## Diffusion and Osmosis in the Plant Cell

It is upon the principles of diffusion and osmosis that the plant
depends, not only for the absorption of water and mineral substances from
the soil, but for most of the circulation of materials which goes on
within the plant body. We have already outlined briefly the structure of
a typical plant cell and may now consider the osmotic interchanges which
go on therein.

The cell wall in plants is ordinarily composed of cellulose. Like most
organic materials, cellulose has the capacity of absorbing water
vigorously by *imbibition* and will therefore swell considerably if
placed, when dry, in contact with water. This expansive ability of the
cell wall is some value in certain of the plants activities, as in the
germination of the seed, but the wall of an ordinary living cell is moist
and has imbibed water to the limit of its capacity. Water, and
practically all substances in solution, pass through this cellulose wall
with great readiness, and since it thus offers practically no resistance
to diffusion, its osmotic effect is slight.

We have noted that, in the mature plant cell, the cytoplasm is dispersed
in a thin layer closely pressed against the inner surface of the
cell-wall, and that it completely surround a large central vacuole or
sap-cavity, filled with water in which various substances, sugar usually
prominent among them, are dissolved. On its outer surface next the wall,
and on its inner surface next the sap-cavity, the cytoplasm is bounded by
a delicate membrane, so that we find here fulfilled all conditions
necessary for osmotic activity - one solution, in sap-cavity, separated
by a membrane or membranes from another solution, which may be the soil
water (in the case of a root-hair) or the sap-solution of an adjacent
cell.

These cytoplasmic membranes, unlike the cell-wall, offer resistance to
the diffusion of certain things and are thus highly important in cell
physiology. We find that they are characteristically semi-permeable,
preventing the passage of such substances as sugar, which are dissolved
in the sap-cavity; and we have already noted that the cell is thus able
to retain these valuable materials within intself and to use them as a
means for bringing in osmotically a continous supply of water from the
soil or from adjacent cells. To the essential mineral salts and to many
other dissolved substances, however, these membranes are generally
permeable, though in varying defrees, and the cell is therefore readily
able to absorb a supply of such substances from any adjacent solution. It
has been found by experiment that the degree of permeability of the cell
membranes is not a fixed and constant one but is subject to chnage from
moment to moment in response to changes in the environment or in the
protoplasm itself. A cell which at one time admits a given substance very
readily may at another allow it to enter but slowly, or may exclude it
altogether. Many of the phsiological activities of the cell are probably
regulated by changed in the permeability of its membranes.

The rapidity with which a substance passes through a membrane is due not
only to these differences in permeability but to differences in the
concentration of the solutoins on the two sides of the membrane. Where
this difference is great (other things being equal) osmotic diffusion
will be more rapid than where it is slight. Therefore if the
concentration of a dissolved subtance within a cell is reduced, either by
its diffusion into an adjacent cell or its conversion into an insoluble
form (as must occur when it enters into the construction of a complex
organic molecule in the protoplasm) the rate at which a new supply enters
the cell from without is at once correspondingly increased; but the
moment its concentration becomes equal, within and without the cell, the
movement of this particular substances ceases, even though others are
passing rapidly through the membranes.

## The Absorption of Water and Salts

This activity of the cell as an osmotic system evidently controls its
most important functions. Let us first consider the role played by
osmosis in that process which the immediate subject of this chapter, the
absorption of water and nutrient materials from the soil. Each root-hair,
as we have seen, is merely a projection from one of the epidermal cells
of the root. The cytoplasm and sap-cavity of the cell extend into the
root-hair, the whole of which is thus lined by a thin cytoplasmic layer,
with its membranes. The root-hair penetrates the soil and comes
intimately in contact with the soil-particles, to the surface of each of
which a thin water-film normally adheres. In this water are dissolved a
great variety of substances, but the total concentration of the soil
solution is normally less than that in the sap-cavity of the root-hair,
where sugar and other materials are dissolved. In obedience to the law of
osmosis, therefore, water will pass from the soil solution through the
cytoplasmic membranes of the root-hair and into its sap-cavity. This flow
of water will continue so long as there is a difference in total density
between soil-solution and sap-solution. Of course if the soil becomes dry
and the film around each particle grows so thin that the surface
attraction of the particle equals the osmotic attraction of the root-hair
solution, the flow will necessarily cease; and if this condition occurs
throughout the whole soil mass, the plant will suffer from drought.

Salts and other substances in the soil-solution diffuse through the
root-hair membranes quite independently of the passage of water, and the
rate at which they enter depends upon the factors which we have above
considered. Any substance which is in greater concentration in the
cell-sap than the soil-water, and to which the membranes are permeable,
will of course, diffuse outwardly into the soil; but except for carbon
dioxide, which is given off in considerable quantities as a product of
respiration in the root, there seems to be comparatively little loss of
material from the plant in this manner.

As water is taken into the sap-cavity of the root-hair, the solution
there becomes less dense; and the first cell of the cortex is
consequently able in turn to withdraw water osmotically from the
root-hair cell. The second row of cortical cells may now withdraw water
from the first, and this process will continue until the water reaches
the central cylinder. The water-ducts here, however, are nothing but dead
shells, their living cytoplasm having disappeared as soon as the thick
cell walls were completed. They are filled with water, and it is hard to
understand why water should move into them from the cells of the cortex
rather than in the reverse direction. In the innermost layer of cortical
cells, a considerable pressure is probably developed by osmosis, and
water may simply be squeezed through the cytoplasm and into these ducts.
We know, at any rate, that water is forced up through the ducts under a
good deal of pressure. This *root-pressure* may be measured by a gauge
attached to an opening in the stem. As to what causes water to rise to
great heights in the trunks of trees we shall speak later; but
root-pressure is apparently only one of the factors involved.

## Other Osmotic Phenomena in the Plant

Not only the absorption of water from the soil, but the whole process of
circulation within the plant body, as well, is primarily an osmotic one;
for the salts taken in by the root-hairs, and any dissolved subtances in
other cells throughout the plant, move from cell to cell by diffusion
through the cytoplasmic membrane.

Still another contribution of osmosis to the plants activities lies in
maintaining the turgidity of the tissues. It is evident that if a cell
has a strong sap-solution and is thus able to absorb water vigorously, it
will become plump and fully expanded and will press tightly against its
neighbors. If all the cells become turgid in this way the whole plant
will tend to be erect and rigid, like an inflated balloon. In the case of
parts which do not possess a firm skeleton, such as the leaf blades,
floral organs, or other comparatively soft structures, this turgidity is
necessary to maintain their form, firmness, and proper functioning.
Conversely, if a cell is exposed to a solution of greater concentration
than its cell-sap, water will be withdrawn from it, it will collapse, and
its cytoplasm will be pulled away from the walls. Such a condition of
*plasmolysis*, if extreme or long-continued, will result in the death of
the cell; and, if extensive, in the death of the plant.

Osmosis also plays an essential part in growth, for at any growing region
we find a point where the cells are multiplying in number but are still
small, and another point behind this where each expands rapidly to its
final size. This expansion, with the consequent stretching of the
cell-walls and growth of the tissues, is due to the rapid absorption of
water by the young and delicate cells, the sap of which is rich in
dissolved sugar. The force exerted by any growing region is thus
primarily due to osmotic pressure.

## Other Functions of the Root

We have briefly discussed the root as an organ of anchorage and of
storage, and in more detail as an organ of absorption. It has less
frequently certain other functions which should be mentioned here. Roots
may arise from almost any part of the stem and sometimes from the leaves.
In many climbing plants they are produced abundantly on these aerial
organs and serve to hold the plant firmly to its support. In corn, stout
roots arise from the stem at a little distance above the ground and pass
into the soil, thus acting as props or guy-ropes for the tall plant. In
epiphytes, the roots are sent out directly into the air and possess a
characteristic spongy envelope which absorbs and holds rain-water and
dew. In parasitic plants the roots are converted into short, sucking
organs, penetrating the host-plant and withdrawing therefrom the food
upon which the parasite lives.

The root and the leaf are the two most important vegetative organs of the
plant, and it is therefore the leaf which we shall next discuss.
